lNTERNATIONAl STUDENT E:D ITIO IN

www.medicalebookpdf.com

GYNAECOLOGY 20th EDITION
by Ten Teachers

www.medicalebookpdf.com

GYNAECOLOGY 20th EDITION
by Ten Teachers
Edited by

Helen Bickerstaff MD, MRCOG
Senior Lecturer in Medical Education
King’s College London
London, UK
and
Honorary Consultant Obstetrician and Gynaecologist
Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust
London, UK

Louise C Kenny MBChB (Hons), MRCOG, PhD
Professor of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
University College Cork
Cork, Ireland
and
Director
The Irish Centre for Fetal and Neonatal Translational Research (INFANT)
Cork, Ireland

www.medicalebookpdf.com

CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2017 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Printed on acid-free paper
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4987-4428-7 (Pack – Book and Ebook)
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4987-4461-4 (Paperback; restricted territorial availability)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. While all reasonable efforts have been made to publish
reliable data and information, neither the author[s] nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility or liability for any errors or omissions
that may be made. The publishers wish to make clear that any views or opinions expressed in this book by individual editors, authors or
contributors are personal to them and do not necessarily reflect the views/opinions of the publishers. The information or guidance contained in
this book is intended for use by medical, scientific or health-care professionals and is provided strictly as a supplement to the medical or other
professional’s own judgement, their knowledge of the patient’s medical history, relevant manufacturer’s instructions and the appropriate best
practice guidelines. Because of the rapid advances in medical science, any information or advice on dosages, procedures or diagnoses should
be independently verified. The reader is strongly urged to consult the relevant national drug formulary and the drug companies’ and device or
material manufacturers’ printed instructions, and their websites, before administering or utilizing any of the drugs, devices or materials
mentioned in this book. This book does not indicate whether a particular treatment is appropriate or suitable for a particular individual.
Ultimately it is the sole responsibility of the medical professional to make his or her own professional judgements, so as to advise and treat
patients appropriately. The authors and publishers have also attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this
publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been
acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any
electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any
information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or
contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit
organization that provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the
CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and
explanation without intent to infringe.
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Dedication
This book is dedicated to the first and best teachers we ever had:
My Dad, Frank (HB)
My Mum, Elizabeth (LCK)

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Contents
Preface
Contributors
Abbreviations
eResources
CHAPTER 1

The development and anatomy of the female sexual organs and pelvis
Helen Bickerstaff

CHAPTER 2

Gynaecological history, examination and investigations
Helen Bickerstaff

CHAPTER 3

Hormonal control of the menstrual cycle and hormonal disorders
Helen Bickerstaff

CHAPTER 4

Disorders of menstrual bleeding
Helen Bickerstaff

CHAPTER 5

Implantation and early pregnancy
Andrew Horne

CHAPTER 6

Contraception and abortion
Sharon Cameron

CHAPTER 7

Subfertility
Stuart Lavery

CHAPTER 8

The menopause and postreproductive health
Edward Morris

CHAPTER 9

Genitourinary problems
Margaret Kingston

CHAPTER 10

Urogynaecology and pelvic floor problems
Douglas Tincello

CHAPTER 11

Benign conditions of the ovary and pelvis
T Justin Clark

CHAPTER 12

Benign conditions of the uterus, cervix and endometrium
T Justin Clark
www.medicalebookpdf.com

CHAPTER 13

Benign conditions of the vulva and vagina, psychosexual disorders and female genital
mutilation
Leila CG Frodsham

CHAPTER 14

Malignant disease of the ovary
Emma J Crosbie

CHAPTER 15

Malignant disease of the uterus
Emma J Crosbie

CHAPTER 16

Premalignant and malignant disease of the lower genital tract
Emma J Crosbie

CHAPTER 17

Gynaecological surgery and therapeutics
Douglas Tincello

Index

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Preface
Gynaecology by Ten Teachers was first published in 1919 as ‘Diseases of Women’ and is one of the
oldest, most respected and accessible texts on the subject. Gynaecology by Ten Teachers has informed
generations of gynaecologists, and now has a wide international audience. There is great responsibility in
revising this landmark 20th edition, to ensure its accessibility and relevance are maintained into the next
century.
The 20th edition has been almost entirely rewritten to reflect both changing undergraduate medical
curricula and changing diagnostic and management protocols in gynaecology. The ‘Ten Teachers’ are all
internationally renowned experts in their fields and all actively involved in the delivery of undergraduate
and postgraduate teaching in the UK. This volume has been edited carefully to ensure consistency of
structure, style and level of detail, in common with those of its sister text Obstetrics by Ten Teachers. The
books can therefore be used together or independently as required. New self assessment sections are
presented consistently throughout, with detailed clinical scenarios for each subject in a structure similar
to those used in most medical schools.
The global status of women’s and girls’ sexual and reproductive health and rights is disturbing.
Millions of women have no access to contraception, undergo female genital mutilation and receive no
gynaecological care. It is fitting, therefore, that the 20th edition, published almost 100 years after the first,
maintains a global aspect throughout.
The aim of the text now, as it was a century ago, is to prepare students for their undergraduate
examinations, and to continue to be useful afterwards in postgraduate studies and clinical practice. It is a
text that the editors used as students, which inspired us to practice and teach in the specialty, and which
we still enjoy reading because it is concise yet comprehensive. We hope that in addition to supporting
medical students throughout their studies, general practitioners, trainees and allied health care
professionals will find it useful in their work.
It has been a privilege and an honour to be the editors of this textbook as it approaches this important
milestone; we echo a century of previous editors in hoping that this book will enthuse a new generation of
doctors to become gynaecologists and work to improve the health and the safety of women through all
reproductive ages.
Helen Bickerstaff
Louise C Kenny

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Contributors
Helen Bickerstaff MD, MRCOG
Senior Lecturer in Medical Education
King’s College London
and
Honorary Consultant Obstetrician and Gynaecologist
Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust
London, UK

Sharon Cameron MD, MFSRH, FRCOG
Consultant Gynaecologist and Clinical Lead for Sexual Health Services
NHS Lothian Chalmers Centre
Edinburgh, UK

T Justin Clark MB ChB, MD(Hons), FRCOG
Consultant Gynaecologist
Birmingham Women’s Hospital
and
Honorary Professor in Gynaecology
University of Birmingham
Birmingham, UK

Emma J Crosbie BSc, MB ChB, PhD, MRCOG
Senior Lecturer and Honorary Consultant Gynaecological Oncologist
University of Manchester
St Mary’s Hospital
Manchester, UK

Leila CG Frodsham, MB ChB, MRCOG
Consultant Gynaecologist
Chair of the Institute of Psychosexual Medicine (2012–15)

Andrew Horne PhD, FRCOG
Personal Chair in Gynaecology and Reproductive Sciences
Honorary Consultant Gynaecologist
MRC Centre for Reproductive Health

www.medicalebookpdf.com

University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, UK

Margaret Kingston BMBS, BMed Sci, FRCP, DipGUM, DFSRH MSc
Consultant Physician
Genitourinary Medicine and Associate Medical Director
Central Manchester Foundation Trust
Manchester, UK

Stuart Lavery MBBCh, MSc, FRCOG
Consultant Gynaecologist
Director IVF Hammersmith
and
Queen Charlotte’s and Chelsea Hospital
and
Honorary Senior Lecturer Imperial College London
London, UK

Edward Morris MD, FRCOG
Consultant Gynaecologist
Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital NHS Foundation Trust
Norwich, UK
and
Vice President, Clinical Quality
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
London, UK

Douglas G Tincello BSc, MBChB, MD, FRCOG, FHEA
Professor of Urogynaecology
Department of Health Sciences
College of Medicine, Biological Sciences and Psychology
University of Leicester
Leicester, UK

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Abbreviations
AFC
AFP
AIDS
ALO
AMH
APS
ART
AUB
AUC
AZF

antral follicle count
α-fetoprotein
acquired immune deficiency syndrome
actimomyces-like organism
anti-Müllerian hormone
antiphospholipid syndrome
assisted reproductive treatment
abnormal uterine bleeding
area under the curve
azoospermic factor

BBV
BEO
BEP
BMD
BMI
BNF
BOT
BRCA
BSO
BV

blood-borne virus
bleeding of endometrial origin
bleomycin, etoposide and cisplatin
bone mineral density
body mass index
British National Formulary
borderline ovarian tumour
breast ovarian cancer syndrome
bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy
bacterial vaginosis

CAH
CAIS
CBT
CGIN
CHC
CIN
CL
CLIA
CNS
COCP
COX

congenital adrenal hyperplasia
complete androgen insensitivity syndrome
cognitive-behavioural therapy
cervical glandular intraepithelial neoplasia
combined hormonal contraception
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia
corpus luteum
chemiluminescence immunoassay
central nervous system
combined oral contraceptive pill
cyclooxygenase

www.medicalebookpdf.com

CPP
CRP
CT
Cu-IUD
CVD

chronic pelvic pain
C-reactive protein
computed tomography
copper intrauterine device
cardiovascular disease

D&C
DHEA
DHT
DNA
DO
DSD
DUB

dilatation and curettage
dehydroepiandrosterone
dihydrotestosterone
deoxyribonucleic acid
detrusor overactivity
disorders of sexual development
dysfunctional uterine bleeding

EB
EC
ECG
EGF
EIA
EP
EVA

endometrial biopsy
emergency contraception
electrocardiography
epidermal growth factor
enzyme immunoassay
ectopic pregnancy
electrical vacuum aspiration

FAB
FBC
FGF
FGM
FH
FIGO
FSH

fertility awareness-based method
full blood count
fibroblast growth factor
female genital mutilation
fetal heartbeat
International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics
follicle-stimulating hormone

GFR
GnRH
GP
GTA
GTD

glomerular filtration rate
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone
general practitioner
gynaecology teaching associate
gestational trophoblastic disease

HAART
(β) hCG
HDL
HFEA
HIV

highly active retroviral therapy
(beta-) human chorionic gonadotrophin
high-density lipoprotein
Human Fertilisation and Embryo Authority
human immunodeficiency virus
www.medicalebookpdf.com

HMB
HNPCC
HPO
HPV
HRT
HSG
HSIL
HSV
HVS
HyCoSy

heavy menstrual bleeding
hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer
hypothalamo–pituitary–ovarian (axis)
human papilloma virus
hormone replacement therapy
hysterosalpingography
high-grade squamous intraepithelial (lesion)
herpes simplex virus
high vaginal swab
hysterocontrast synography

ICSI
Ig
IGF
IMB
ISD
IUD
IUI
IUS
IVF

intracytoplasmic sperm injection
immunoglobulin
insulin-like growth factor
intermenstrual bleeding
intrinsic sphincter deficiency
intrauterine device
intrauterine insemination
intrauterine releasing system
in-vitro fertilization

LARC
LAVH
LBC
LDL
LH
LLETZ
LMP
LMWH
LNG-IUS
LOD

long-acting reversible methods of contraception
laparoscopic-aided vaginal hysterectomy
liquid-based cytology
low-density lipoprotein
luteinizing hormone
large loop excision of transformation zone
last menstrual period
low-molecular weight heparin
levonorgestrel intrauterine system
laparoscopic ovarian drilling

MAS
MBL
MDT
MEC
MRI
MRKH
MSU
MTCT
MVA

minimal access surgery
mean blood loss
multidisciplinary team
medical eligibility criteria
magnetic resonance imaging
Mayer–Rokitansky–Kuster–Hauser syndrome
midstream urine sample
mother-to-child transmission
manual vacuum aspiration
www.medicalebookpdf.com

NAAT

nucleic acid amplification test

NICE
NSAID

National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug

OAB
OCP
17-OHP
OHSS
OI
OPH

overactive bladder
oral contraceptive pill
17-hydroxyprogesterone
ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome
ovulation induction
outpatient hysteroscopy

PAC
PAF
PCB
PCOS
PCR
PG
PGD
PGI
PID
PMB
PMS
POCT
POF
POI
POP
PPC
PPH
PUL

preassessment clinic
platelet activating factor
postcoital bleeding
polycystic ovary syndrome
polymerase chain reaction
prostaglandin
preimplantation genetic diagnosis
prostacyclin
pelvic inflammatory disease
postmenopausal bleeding
premenstrual syndrome
point of care test
premature ovarian failure
premature ovarian insufficiency
progestogen-only pill
primary peritoneal carcinoma
postpartum haemorrhage
pregnancy of unknown location

REM
RCOG
RMI
RNA
RPOC
RPR
RR

rapid eye movement
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
Risk of Malignancy Index
ribonucleic acid
retained products of conception
rapid plasma reagin
relative risk

SCJ
SERM

squamocolumnar junction
selective oestrogen receptor modulator
www.medicalebookpdf.com

SFA
SHBG

semen fluid analysis
sex hormone-binding globulin

SIS
SPRM
SSR
SSRI
STI
STIC
STOP

saline instillation sonography
selective progesterone receptor modulator
surgical sperm retrieval
selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitor
sexually-transmitted infection
serous tubal intraepithelial carcinoma
surgical termination of pregnancy

TAUSS
TCRF
TED
TGF
TLH
TOT
TPHA
TPPA
TV
TVT
TVUSS
TZ

transabdominal ultrasound scan
transcervical resection of fibroid
thromboembolic stocking
transforming growth factor
total laparoscopic hysterectomy
transobturator tape
T. pallidum haemagglutination assay
T. pallidum particle assay
Trichomonas vaginalis
tension-free vaginal tape
transvaginal ultrasound scan
transformation zone

UAE
UPA
UPT
USS

umbilical/uterine artery embolization
ulipristal acetate
urinary pregnancy test
ultrasound scan

VaIN
VDRL
VEGF
VIN
VTE

vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia
Venereal Disease Reference Laboratory
vascular endothelial growth factor
vulval intraepithelial neoplasia
venous thromboembolism

WCC
WHI
WHO

white cell count
Women’s Health Initiative
World Health Organization

www.medicalebookpdf.com

eResources

Chapter 2

Gynaecological history, examination and investigations

eResource 2.1

The gynaecological consultation
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv2.1.php

eResource 2.2

Ultrasound imaging in gynaecology
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv2.2.php

Chapter 3

Hormonal control of the menstrual cycle and hormonal
disorders

eResource 3.1

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv3.1.php

eResource 3.2

Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) patient guidance
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv3.2.php

Chapter 4

Disorders of menstrual bleeding

eResource 4.1

Heavy menstrual bleeding (HMB) history and examination
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv4.1.php

eResource 4.2

Endometrial ablation
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv4.2.php

Chapter 5

Implantation and early pregnancy

eResource 5.1

Pregnancy between 5 and 12 weeks’ gestation
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv5.1.php

eResource 5.2

Ectopic pregnancy
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv5.2.php
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Chapter 6

Contraception and abortion

eResource 6.1

Laparoscopic sterilization
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv6.1.php

Chapter 7

Subfertility

eResource 7.1

Tubal blockage
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv7.1.php

eResource 7.2

Normal and abnormal sperm
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv7.2.php

eResource 7.3

Egg collection using transvaginal ultrasound (TVUSS)
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv7.3.php

eResource 7.4

Transvaginal ultrasound (TVUSS) guided embryo transfer
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv7.4.php

eResource 7.5

Embryo biopsy for preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD)
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv7.5.php

Chapter 11

Benign conditions of the ovary and pelvis

eResource 11.1

Ovarian cysts
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv11.1.php

eResource 11.2

Transvaginal ultrasound (TVUSS) of the pelvis with endometriosis
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv11.2.php

Chapter 12

Benign conditions of the uterus, cervix and endometrium

eResource 12.1

Endometrial polyps
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv12.1.ph

eResource 12.2

Surgical treatment of fibroids
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv12.2.ph

Chapter 14

Malignant disease of the ovary

eResource 14.1

Surgery for epithelial ovarian cancer
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv14.1.ph
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Chapter 15

Malignant disease of the uterus

eResource 15.1

Surgical treatment of endometrial cancer
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv15.1.ph

Chapter 17

Gyaecological surgery and therapeutics

eResource 17.1

Laparoscopy
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv17.1.ph

You can access the resources (video clips and still images) that are referenced above and indicated in the
text with the icon
by entering the URLs provided in the browser of your choice.
In addition, the videos and images from this book can be accessed via the companion website that
accompanies this textbook www.routledge.com/cw/kenny where you will also find resources for the
sister volume, Obstetrics by Ten Teachers, 20th Edition. Additional video clips and still images will be
added to this library over time.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

CHAPTER 1

The development and anatomy of the female
sexual organs and pelvis
HELEN BICKERSTAFF

Sexual differentiation of the fetus and development of sexual organs
Female anatomy
Structural problems of pelvic organs
Further reading
Self assessment

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
• Understand that sexual differentiation and development begin in early embryonic life.
• Understand the embryonic development and the anatomy of the perineum, the vagina, cervix and
uterus, the adnexa and ovary and the bladder and ureters.
• Describe the blood supply and lymphatics of the perineum and pelvis.
• Understand the innervation of the perineum and pelvis.
• Understand the vulnerability of certain structures in gynaecological surgery.
• Describe the structural anomalies resulting from Müllerian tract disorders.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Sexual differentiation of the fetus and development of sexual organs
The gonadal rudiments appear as the ‘genital ridge’ overlying the embryonic kidney in the intermediate
mesoderm during the fourth week of embryonic life, and they remain sexually indifferent until the seventh
(Figure 1.1). The undifferentiated gonad has the potential to become either a testis or an ovary, and hence
is termed bipotential, and the chromosomal complement of the zygote determines whether the gonad
becomes a testis or an ovary. The development of either the testis or ovary is an active gene-directed
process. In the male the activity of the SRY gene (sex-determining region of the Y chromosome) causes
the gonad to begin development into a testis. In the past, ovarian development was considered a ‘default’
development due solely to the absence of SRY, but in the last 10 years ovarian-determining genes have
also been found that actively lead to the development of a female gonad.
The fetus has two sets of structures called the Müllerian (or paramesonephric) ducts and Wolffian (or
mesonephric) ducts, which have the potential to develop into male or female internal and external
genitalia respectively.

Development of the male sexual organs
As the gonad develops into a testis, it differentiates into two cell types. The Sertoli cells produce antiMüllerian hormone (AMH) and the Leydig cells produce testosterone. AMH suppresses further
development of the Müllerian ducts whereas testosterone stimulates the Wolffian ducts to develop into the
vas deferens, epididymis and seminal vesicles. In addition, in the external genital skin, testosterone is
converted by the enzyme 5-alpha-reductase into dihydrotestosterone (DHT). This acts to virilize the
external genitalia. The genital tubercle becomes the penis and the labioscrotal folds fuse to form the
scrotum. The urogenital folds fuse along the ventral surface of the penis and enclose the urethra so that it
opens at the tip of the penis.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 1.1 A: Cross-section diagram of the posterior abdominal wall showing the genital ridge; B:
diagrammatic representation of the embryological pathways of male and female development. (DHT:
dihydrotestosterone.)

Development of the female sexual organs
In the primitive ovary granulosa cells, derived from the proliferating coelomic epithelium, surround the
germ cells and form primordial follicles. Each primordial follicle consists of an oocyte within a single
www.medicalebookpdf.com

layer of granulosa cells. Theca cells develop from the proliferating coelomic epithelium and are
separated from the granulosa cells by a basal lamina. The maximum number of primordial follicles is
reached at 20 weeks’ gestation when there are six to seven million primordial follicles present. The
numbers of these reduce by atresia and at birth only 1–2 million remain. Atresia continues throughout life
and by menarche only 300,000–400,000 are present, and by menopause none.
The development of an oocyte within a primordial follicle is arrested at the prophase of its first
meiotic division. It remains in that state until it undergoes atresia or enters the meiotic process preceding
ovulation.
In the female, the absence of testicular AMH allows the Müllerian structures to develop and the female
reproductive tract develops from these paired ducts. The proximal two-thirds of the vagina develop from
the paired Müllerian ducts, which grow in a caudal and medial direction and fuse in the midline. The
midline fusion of these structures produces the uterus, cervix and upper vagina, and the unfused caudal
segments form the Fallopian tubes, as shown in Figure 1.2.
Cells proliferate from the upper portion of the urogenital sinus to form structures called the
‘sinovaginal bulbs’. The caudal extension of the Müllerian ducts projects into the posterior wall of the
urogenital sinus as the Müllerian tubercle. The Müllerian tubercles and the urogenital sinus fuse to form
the vaginal plate, which extends from the Müllerian ducts to the urogenital sinus. This plate begins to
canalize, starting at the hymen and proceeding upwards to the cervix in the sixth embryonic month.

Figure 1.2 Caudal parts of the paramesonephric ducts (top) fuse to form the uterus and Fallopian tubes.

External female genitalia
The external genitalia do not virilize in the absence of testosterone. Between the fifth and seventh weeks
of life, the cloacal folds, which are a pair of swellings adjacent to the cloacal membrane, fuse anteriorly
to become the genital tubercle. This will become the clitoris. The perineum develops and divides the
www.medicalebookpdf.com

cloacal membrane into an anterior urogenital membrane and a posterior anal membrane. The cloacal folds
anteriorly are called the urethral folds, which form the labia minora. Another pair of folds within the
cloacal membrane form the labioscrotal folds that eventually become the labia majora. The urogenital
sinus becomes the vestibule of the vagina. The external genitalia are recognizably female by the end of the
twelfth embryonic week.

KEY LEARNING POINTS
• The primitive gonad is first evident at 5 weeks of embryonic life and forms on the medial aspect of
the mesonephric ridge.
• The undifferentiated gonad has the potential to become either a testis or an ovary.
• The paramesonephric duct, which later forms the Müllerian system, is the precursor of female
genital development.
• The lower end of the Müllerian ducts fuse in the midline to form the uterus and upper vagina.
• Most of the upper vagina is of Müllerian origin, while the lower vagina forms from the sinovaginal
bulbs.
• Primordial follicles contain an oocyte arrested in prophase surrounded by granulosa cells
separated by a basement membrane from Leydig cells.
• The maximum number of primordial follicles is reached at 20 weeks’ gestation. These reduce by
atresia throughout childhood and adult life.

Female anatomy
External genitalia
The external genitalia are commonly called the vulva and include the mons pubis, labia majora and
minora, the vaginal vestibule, the clitoris and the greater vestibular glands. The mons pubis is a fibro-fatty
pad covered by hair-bearing skin that covers the bony pubic ramus.
The labia majora are two folds of skin with underlying adipose tissue lying either side of the vaginal
opening. They contain sebaceous and sweat glands and a few specialized apocrine glands. In the deepest
part of each labium is a core of fatty tissue continuous with that of the inguinal canal and the fibres of the
round ligament, which terminate here.
The labia minora are two thin folds of skin that lie between the labia majora. These vary in size and
may protrude beyond the labia major where they are visible, but may also be concealed by the labia
majora. Anteriorly, they divide in two to form the prepuce and frenulum of the clitoris (clitoral hood).
Posteriorly, they divide to form a fold of skin called the fourchette at the back of the vagina introitus. They
contain sebaceous glands, but have no adipose tissue. They are not well developed before puberty and
atrophy after the menopause. Both the labia minora and labia majora become engorged during sexual
arousal.
The clitoris is an erectile structure measuring approximately 0.5–3.5 cm in length. The body of the
clitoris is the main part of the visible clitoris and is made up of paired columns of erectile tissue and
vascular tissue called the ‘corpora cavernosa’. These become the crura at the bottom of the clitoris and
www.medicalebookpdf.com

run deeper and laterally. The vestibule is the cleft between the labia minora. It contains openings of the
urethra, the Bartholin’s glands and the vagina. The vagina is surrounded by two bulbs of erectile and
vascular tissue that are extensive and almost completely cover the distal vaginal wall. These have
traditionally been named the bulb of the vaginal vestibule, although recent work on both dissection and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) suggests that they may be part of the clitoris and should be renamed
‘clitoral bulbs’. Their function is unknown but they probably add support to the distal vaginal wall to
enhance its rigidity during penetration.
The Bartholin’s glands are bilateral and about the size of a pea. They open via a 2 cm duct into the
vestibule below the hymen and contribute to lubrication during intercourse.
The hymen is a thin covering of mucous membrane across the entrance to the vagina. It is usually
perforated, which allows menstruation. The hymen is ruptured during intercourse and any remaining tags
are called ‘carunculae myrtiformes’.

Internal reproductive organs (Figure 1.3)
The vagina
The vagina is a fibromuscular canal lined with stratified squamous epithelium that leads from the uterus to
the vulva. It is longer in the posterior wall (approximately 9 cm) than in the anterior wall (approximately
7 cm). The vaginal walls are normally in apposition, except at the vault where they are separated by the
cervix. The vault of the vagina is divided into four fornices: posterior, anterior and two lateral.
The midvagina is a transverse slit while the lower vagina is an H-shape in transverse section. The
vaginal walls are lined with transverse folds. The vagina has no glands and is kept moist by secretions
from the uterine and cervical glands and by transudation from its epithelial lining. The epithelium is thick
and rich in glycogen, which increases in the postovulatory phase of the cycle. However, before puberty
and after the menopause, the vagina is devoid of glycogen due to the lack of oestrogen. Doderlein’s
bacillus is a normal commensal of the vaginal flora and breaks down glycogen to form lactic acid,
producing a pH of around 4.5. This has a protective role for the vagina in decreasing the growth of
pathogenic bacteria.
The upper posterior wall forms the anterior peritoneal reflection of the pouch of Douglas. The middle
third is separated from the rectum by pelvic fascia and the lower third abuts the perineal body. Anteriorly,
the vagina is in direct contact with the base of the bladder, while the urethra runs down the lower half in
the midline to open into the vestibule. Its muscles fuse with the anterior vagina wall. Laterally, at the
fornices, the vagina is related to the cardinal ligaments. Below this are the levator ani muscles and the
ischiorectal fossae. The cardinal ligaments and the uterosacral ligaments, which form posteriorly from the
parametrium, support the upper part of the vagina.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 1.3 Sagittal section of the female pelvis.
At birth, the vagina is under the influence of maternal oestrogens so the epithelium is well developed.
After a couple of weeks, the effects of the oestrogen disappear and the pH rises to 7 and the epithelium
atrophies. At puberty, the reverse occurs and finally at the menopause the vagina tends to shrink and the
epithelium atrophies once again.

The uterus
The uterus is shaped like an inverted pear tapering inferiorly to the cervix and in its non-pregnant state is
situated entirely within the pelvis. It is hollow and has thick, muscular walls. Its maximum external
dimensions are approximately 7.5 cm long, 5 cm wide and 3 cm thick. An adult uterus weighs
approximately 70 g. In the upper part, the uterus is termed the body or ‘corpus’. The area of insertion of
each Fallopian tube is termed the ‘cornu’ and that part of the body above the cornu is called the ‘fundus’.
The uterus tapers to a small constricted area, the isthmus, and below this is the cervix, which projects
obliquely into the vagina. The longitudinal axis of the uterus is approximately at right angles to the vagina
and normally tilts forward. This is called ‘anteversion’. In addition, the long axis of the cervix is rarely
the same as the long axis of the uterus. The uterus is also usually flexed forward on itself at the isthmus –
antiflexion. However, in around 20% of women, the uterus is tilted backwards – retroversion and
retroflexion. This has no pathological significance in most women, although retroversion that is fixed and
immobile may be associated with endometriosis. This has relevance in gynaecological surgery and is
referred to again in Chapter 2, Gynaecological history, examination and investigations.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

The cavity of the uterus is the shape of an inverted triangle and when sectioned coronally the Fallopian
tubes open at lateral angles The constriction at the isthmus where the corpus joins the cervix is the
anatomical os. Seen microscopically, the site of the histological internal os is where the mucous
membrane of the isthmus becomes that of the cervix.
The uterus consists of three layers: the outer serous layer (peritoneum), the middle muscular layer
(myometrium) and the inner mucous layer (endometrium). The peritoneum covers the body of the uterus
and posteriorly it covers the supravaginal part of the cervix. The peritoneum is intimately attached to a
subserous fibrous layer, except laterally where it spreads out to form the leaves of the broad ligament.
The muscular myometrium forms the main bulk of the uterus and is made up of interlacing smooth
muscle fibres intermingling with areolar tissue, blood vessels, nerves and lymphatics. Externally, the
muscle fibres are mostly longitudinal, but the thicker intermediate layer has interlacing longitudinal,
oblique and transverse fibres. Internally, they are mainly longitudinal and circular.
The inner endometrial layer has tubular glands that dip into the myometrium. The endometrial layer is
covered by a single layer of columnar epithelium. Ciliated prior to puberty, this epithelium is mostly lost
due to the effects of pregnancy and menstruation. The endometrium undergoes cyclical changes during
menstruation, as described in Chapter 3, Hormonal control of the menstrual cycle and hormonal disorders,
and varies in thickness.

The cervix
The cervix is narrower than the body of the uterus and is approximately 2.5 cm in length. Lateral to the
cervix lies cellular connective tissue called the parametrium. The ureter runs about 1 cm laterally to the
supravaginal cervix within the parametrium. The posterior aspect of the cervix is covered by the
peritoneum of the pouch of Douglas.
The upper part of the cervix mostly consists of involuntary muscle, whereas the lower part is mainly
fibrous connective tissue. The mucous membrane of the cervical canal (endocervix) has anterior and
posterior columns from which folds radiate out, the ‘arbour vitae’. It has numerous deep glandular
follicles that secrete clear alkaline mucus, the main component of physiological vaginal discharge. The
epithelium of the endocervix is columnar and is also ciliated in its upper two-thirds. This changes to
stratified squamous epithelium around the region of the external os and the junction of these two types of
epithelium is called the ‘squamocolumnar junction’.

Age changes to anatomy
The disappearance of maternal oestrogens from the circulation after birth causes the uterus to decrease in
length by around one-third and in weight by around one-half. The cervix is then twice the length of the
uterus. During childhood, the uterus grows slowly in length, in parallel with height and age. The average
longitudinal diameter ranges from 2.5 cm at the age of 2 years, to 3.5 cm at 10 years. After the onset of
puberty, the anteroposterior and transverse diameters of the uterus start to increase, leading to a sharper
rise in the volume of the uterus. The increase in uterine volume continues well after menarche and the
uterus reaches its adult size and configuration by the late teenage years. After the menopause, the uterus
atrophies, the mucosa becomes very thin, the glands almost disappear and the wall becomes relatively
less muscular.

The Fallopian tubes
www.medicalebookpdf.com

The Fallopian tube extends outwards from the uterine cornu to end near the ovary. At the abdominal
ostium, the tube opens into the peritoneal cavity, which is therefore in communication with the exterior of
the body via the uterus and the vagina. This is essential to allow the sperm and egg to meet. The Fallopian
tubes convey the ovum from the ovary towards the uterus and promote oxygenation and nutrition for
sperm, ovum and zygote should fertilization occur.
The Fallopian tube runs in the upper margin of the broad ligament, known as the mesosalpinx, which
encloses the tube so that it is completely covered with peritoneum, except for a narrow strip along this
inferior aspect. Each tube is about 10 cm long and is described in four parts:
• The interstitial portion.
• The isthmus.
• The ampulla.
• The infundibulum or fimbrial portion.
The interstitial portion lies within the wall of the uterus, while the isthmus is the narrow portion
adjoining the uterus. This passes into the widest and longest portion, the ampulla. This, in turn, terminates
in the extremity known as the ‘infundibulum’. The opening of the tube into the peritoneal cavity is
surrounded by finger-like processes, known as fimbria, into which the muscle coat does not extend. The
inner surfaces of the fimbriae are covered by ciliated epithelium that is similar to the lining of the
Fallopian tube itself. One of these fimbriae is longer than the others and extends to, and partially
embraces, the ovary. The muscular fibres of the wall of the tube are arranged in an inner circular and an
outer longitudinal layer.
The tubal epithelium forms a number of branched folds or plicae that run longitudinally; the lumen of
the ampulla is almost filled with these folds. The folds have a cellular stroma, but at their bases the
epithelium is only separated from the muscle by a very scanty amount of stroma. There is no submucosa
and there are no glands. The epithelium of the Fallopian tubes contains two functioning cell types: the
ciliated cells, which act to produce constant current of fluid in the direction of the uterus, and the
secretory cells, which contribute to the volume of tubal fluid. Changes occur under the influence of the
menstrual cycle, but there is no cell shedding during menstruation.

The ovaries
The size and appearance of the ovaries depends on both age and stage of the menstrual cycle. In a child,
the ovaries are small structures approximately 1.5 cm long; however, they increase to adult size in puberty
due to proliferation of stromal cells and commencing maturation of the ovarian follicles. In the young
adult, they are almond-shaped and measure approximately 3 cm long, 1.5 cm wide and 1 cm thick. After
the menopause, no active follicles are present and the ovary becomes smaller with a wrinkled surface.
The ovary is the only intra-abdominal structure not to be covered by peritoneum. Each ovary is attached
to the cornu of the uterus by the ovarian ligament and at the hilum to the broad ligament by the
mesovarium, which contains its supply of nerves and blood vessels. Laterally, each ovary is attached to
the suspensory ligament of the ovary with folds of peritoneum that becomes continuous with that of the
overlying psoas major.
Anterior to the ovaries lie the Fallopian tubes, the superior portion of the bladder and the uterovesical
pouch. Posterior to the ovary lies the ureter where it runs downwards and forwards in front of the internal
iliac artery.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Structure of the ovary
The ovary has a central vascular medulla consisting of loose connective tissue containing many elastin
fibres and non-striated muscle cells. It has an outer thicker cortex, denser than the medulla, consisting of
networks of reticular fibres and fusiform cells, although there is no clear-cut demarcation between the
two. The surface of the ovaries is covered by a single layer of cuboidal cells, the germinal epithelium.
Beneath this is an ill-defined layer of condensed connective tissue called the ‘tunica albuginea’, which
increases in density with age. At birth, numerous primordial follicles are found, mostly in the cortex, but
some are found in the medulla. With puberty, some form each month into the graafian follicles under
gonadotrophic control, to ovulate and subsequently form corpus lutea and ultimately the atretic follicles,
the corpora albicans.

The bladder, urethra and ureter
The bladder
The bladder wall is made of involuntary muscle arranged in an inner longitudinal layer, a middle circular
layer and an outer longitudinal layer. It is lined with transitional epithelium and has an average capacity
of 400 ml.
The ureters open into the base of the bladder after running medially for about 1 cm through the bladder
wall. The urethra leaves the bladder below the ureteric orifices. The triangular area lying between the
ureteric orifices and the internal meatus of the urethra is known as the ‘trigone’. At the internal meatus, the
middle layer of muscle forms anterior and posterior loops round the neck of the bladder, some fibres of
the loops being continuous with the circular muscle of the urethra.
The base of the bladder is adjacent to the cervix, with only a thin layer of tissue intervening. It is
separated from the anterior vaginal wall below by the pubocervical fascia that stretches from the pubis to
the cervix.

The urethra
The female urethra is about 3.5 cm long and is lined with transitional epithelium. It has a slight posterior
angulation at the junction of its lower and middle thirds. The smooth muscle of its wall is arranged in
outer longitudinal and inner circular layers. As the urethra passes through the two layers of the urogenital
diaphragm, it is embraced by the striated fibres of the deep transverse perineal muscle (also known as the
compressor urethrae) and some of the striated fibres of this muscle form a loop on the urethra. Between
the muscular coat and the epithelium is a plexus of veins. There are a number of tubular mucous glands
and in the lower part a number of crypts that occasionally become infected. In its upper two-thirds, the
urethra is separated from the symphysis by loose connective tissue, but in its lower third it is attached to
the pubic ramus on each side by strong bands of fibrous tissue called the ‘pubourethral tissue’.
Posteriorly, it is firmly attached in its lower two-thirds to the anterior vaginal wall. This means that the
upper part of the urethra is mobile, but the lower part is relatively fixed.
Medial fibres of the pubococcygeus of the levator ani muscles are inserted into the urethra and vaginal
wall. When they contract, they pull the anterior vaginal wall and the upper part of the urethra forwards
forming an angle of about 100° between the posterior wall of the urethra and the bladder base. On
voluntary voiding of urine, the base of the bladder and the upper part of the urethra descend and the
posterior angle disappears so that the base of the bladder and the posterior wall of the urethra come to lie
in a straight line.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

The ureter
As the ureter crosses the pelvic brim, it lies in front of the bifurcation of the common iliac artery. It runs
downwards and forwards on the lateral wall of the pelvis to reach the pelvic floor and then passes
inwards and forwards attached to the peritoneum of the back of the broad ligament to pass beneath the
uterine artery. It next passes forward through a fibrous tunnel, the ureteric canal, in the upper part of the
cardinal ligament. Finally, it runs close to the lateral vaginal fornix to enter the trigone of the bladder.
Its blood supply is derived from small branches of the ovarian artery, from a small vessel arising near
the iliac bifurcation, from a branch of the uterine artery where it crosses beneath it and from small
branches of the vesical artery.

Box 1.1 Ureteric damage during hysterectomy
Because of its close relationship to the cervix, the vault of the vagina and the uterine artery, the ureter
may be damaged during hysterectomy. Apart from being cut or tied, in radical procedures, the ureter
may undergo necrosis because of interference with its blood supply. It may be displaced by scar tissue
or by fibromyomata or cysts that are growing between the layers of the broad ligament and may suffer
injury if its position is not noticed at surgery.

The rectum
The rectum extends from the level of the third sacral vertebra to a point about 2.5 cm in front of the
coccyx where it passes through the pelvic floor to become continuous with the anal canal. Its direction
follows the curve of the sacrum and is about 11 cm in length. The front and sides are covered by the
peritoneum of the rectovaginal pouch. In the middle third only the front is covered by peritoneum. In the
lower third there is no peritoneal covering and the rectum is separated from the posterior wall of the
vagina by the rectovaginal fascial septum. Lateral to the rectum are the uterosacral ligaments, beside
which run some of the lymphatics draining the cervix and vagina.

The pelvic muscles, ligaments and fascia
The pelvic diaphragm (Figure 1.4)
The pelvic diaphragm is formed by the levator ani muscles, which are broad, flat muscles the fibres of
which pass downwards and inwards. The two muscles, one on either side, constitute the pelvic
diaphragm. The muscles arise by linear origin from the following points:
• The lower part of the body of the os pubis.
• The internal surface of the parietal pelvic fascia along the white line.
• The pelvic surface of the ischial spine.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 1.4 Pelvic floor musculature.
The levator ani muscles are inserted into the following points:
• The preanal raphe and the central point of the perineum, where one muscle meets the other on the
opposite side.
• The wall of the anal canal, where the fibres blend with the deep external sphincter muscle.
• The postanal or anococcygeal raphe, where again one muscle meets the other on the opposite side.
• The lower part of the coccyx.
The muscle is described in two parts:
• The pubococcygeus, which arises from the pubic bone and the anterior part of the tendinous arch of the
pelvic fascia (the ‘white line’).
• The iliococcygeus, which arises from the posterior part of the tendinous arch and the ischial spine.
The medial borders of the pubococcygeus muscle pass on either side from the pubic bone to the
preanal raphe. They thus embrace the vagina and on contraction have some sphincteric action. The nerve
supply is from the third and fourth sacral nerves. The pubococcygeus muscles support the pelvic and
abdominal viscera, including the bladder. The medial edge passes beneath the bladder and runs laterally
to the urethra, into which some of its fibres are inserted. Together with the fibres from the opposite
muscle, they form a loop that maintains the angle between the posterior aspect of the urethra and the
bladder base. During micturition, this loop relaxes to allow the bladder neck and upper urethra to open
and descend.

Urogenital diaphragm
The urogenital diaphragm (also known as the triangular ligament) is made up of two layers of pelvic
fascia that fill the gap between the descending pubic rami and lies beneath the levator ani muscles. The
www.medicalebookpdf.com

deep transverse perineal muscles (compressor urethrae) lie between the two layers and the diaphragm is
pierced by the urethra and vagina.

The perineal body
This is a mass of muscular tissue that lies between the anal canal and the lower third of the vagina. Its
apex is at the lower end of the rectovaginal septum at the point where the rectum and posterior vaginal
walls come into contact. Its base is covered with skin and extends from the fourchette to the anus. It is the
point of insertion of the superficial perineal muscles and is bounded above by the levator ani muscles
where they come into contact in the midline between the posterior vaginal wall and the rectum.

The pelvic peritoneum
The peritoneum is reflected from the lateral borders of the uterus to form, on either side, a double fold of
peritoneum – the broad ligament. Despite the name, this is not a ligament but a peritoneal fold and it does
not support the uterus. The Fallopian tube runs in the upper free edge of the broad ligament as far as the
point at which the tube opens into the peritoneal cavity. The part of the broad ligament that is lateral to the
opening is called the ‘infundibulopelvic fold’ and in it the ovarian vessels and nerves pass from the side
wall of the pelvis to lie between the two layers of the broad ligament. The mesosalpinx, the portion of the
broad ligament that lies above the ovary, is layered; between its layers are seen any Wolffian remnants
that may remain. Below the ovary, the base of the broad ligament widens out and contains a considerable
amount of loose connective tissue called the ‘parametrium’. The ureter is attached to the posterior leaf of
the broad ligament at this point.
The ovary is attached to the posterior layer of the broad ligament by a short mesentry (the
mesovarium) through which the ovarian vessels and nerves enter the hilum.

The ovarian ligament and round ligament (Figure 1.5A)
The ovarian ligament lies beneath the posterior layer of the broad ligament and passes from the medial
pole of the ovary to the uterus just below the point of entry of the Fallopian tube.
The round ligament is the continuation of the same structure and runs forwards under the anterior leaf
of peritoneum to enter the inguinal canal, ending in the subcutaneous tissue of the labium major.

The pelvic fascia and pelvic cellular tissue (Figure 1.5B)
Connective tissue fills the irregular spaces between the various pelvic organs. Much of it is loose cellular
tissue, but in some places it is condensed to form strong ligaments that contain some smooth muscle fibres
and which form the fascial sheaths that enclose the various viscera. The pelvic arteries, veins, lymphatics,
nerves and ureters run through it. The cellular tissue is continuous above with the extraperitoneal tissue of
the abdominal wall, but below it is cut off from the ischiorectal fossa by the pelvic fascia and the levator
ani muscles. The pelvic fascia may be regarded as a specialized part of this connective tissue and has
parietal and visceral components.
The parietal pelvic fascia lines the wall of the pelvic cavity covering the obturator and pyramidalis
muscles. The thickened tendinous arch (known as the white line) lies on the side wall of the pelvis. It is
here that the levator ani muscle arises and the cardinal ligament gains its lateral attachment. Where the
www.medicalebookpdf.com

parietal pelvic fascia encounters bone, as in the pubic region, it blends with the periosteum. It also forms
the upper layer of the urogenital diaphragm.
Each viscus has a fascial sheath that is dense in the case of the vagina and cervix and at the base of the
bladder, but is tenuous or absent over the body of the uterus and the dome of the bladder. From the point
of view of the gynaecologist, certain parts of the visceral fascia are important, as follows:
• The cardinal ligaments (transverse cervical ligaments) provide the essential support of the uterus and
vaginal vault. These are two strong fan-shaped fibromuscular bands that pass from the cervix and
vaginal vault to the side wall of the pelvis on either side.
• The uterosacral ligaments run from the cervix and vaginal vault to the sacrum. In the erect position, they
are almost vertical in direction and support the cervix.
• The bladder is supported laterally by condensations of the vesical pelvic fascia, one each side, and by a
sheet of pubocervical fascia, which lies beneath it anteriorly.

The blood supply (Figure 1.6)
Arteries supplying the pelvic organs
Because the ovary develops on the posterior abdominal wall and later migrates down into the pelvis, it
carries its blood supply with it directly from the abdominal aorta. The ovarian artery arises from the aorta
just below the renal artery and runs downwards on the surface of the psoas muscle to the pelvic brim,
where it crosses in front of the ureter and then passes into the infundibulopelvic fold of the broad
ligament. The artery divides into branches that supply the ovary and tube and then run on to reach the
uterus, where they anastamose with the terminal branches of the uterine artery.

The internal iliac (hypogastic) artery
This vessel is about 4 cm in length and begins at the bifurcation of the common iliac artery in front of the
sacroiliac joint. It soon divides into anterior and posterior branches; the branches that supply the pelvic
organs are all from the anterior division and are as follows:

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 1.5 A: The round and broad ligaments; B: the cervical and uterine ligaments.
• The uterine artery provides the main blood supply to the uterus. The artery first runs downwards on the
lateral wall of the pelvis, in the same direction as the ureter. It then turns inward and forwards lying in
the base of the broad ligament. On reaching the wall of the uterus, the artery turns upwards to run
tortuously to the upper part of the uterus, where it anastamoses with the ovarian artery. In this part of its
course, it sends many branches into the substance of the uterus. The uterine artery supplies a branch to
www.medicalebookpdf.com

the ureter as it crosses it and shortly afterwards another branch is given off to supply the cervix and
upper vagina.
• The vaginal artery runs at a lower level to supply the vagina.
• The vesical arteries are variable in number and supply the bladder and terminal ureter. One usually runs
in the roof of the ureteric canal.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 1.6 Blood supply of the pelvis and perineum.
• The middle rectal artery often arises in common with the lowest vesical artery.
• The pudendal artery leaves the pelvic cavity through the sciatic foramen and, after winding round the
ischial spine, enters the ischiorectal fossa where it gives off the inferior rectal artery. It terminates in the
perineal and vulval arteries, supplying the erectile tissue of the vestibular bulbs and clitoris.

The superior rectal artery
This artery is the continuation of the inferior mesenteric artery and descends in the base of the mesocolon.
It divides into two branches that run on either side of the rectum and supply numerous branches to it.

The pelvic veins
The veins around the bladder, uterus, vagina and rectum form plexuses that intercommunicate freely.
Venous drainage from the uterine, vaginal and vesical plexus is chiefly into the internal iliac veins.
Venous drainage from the rectal plexus is via the superior rectal veins to the inferior mesenteric veins,
and the middle and inferior rectal veins to the internal pudendal veins and so to the iliac veins.
The ovarian veins on each side begin in the pampiniform plexus, which lies between the layers of the
broad ligament. At first, there are two veins on each side accompanying the corresponding ovarian artery.
Higher up the vein becomes single, with that on the right ending in the inferior vena cava and that on the
left in the left renal vein.

Lymphatics
The pelvic lymphatics (Figure 1.7)
Lymph draining from all the lower extremities and the vulva and perineal regions is all filtered through
the inguinal and superficial femoral nodes before continuing along the deep pathways on the side wall of
the pelvis. One deep chain passes upwards lateral to the major blood vessels, forming in turn the external
iliac, common iliac and para-aortic groups of nodes.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 1.7 Lymphatic drainage of the pelvis and perineum.
Medially, another chain of vessels passes from the deep femoral nodes through the femoral canal to the
obturator and internal iliac groups of nodes. These last nodes are interspersed among the origins of the
branches of the internal iliac artery receiving lymph directly from the organs supplied by this artery,
including the upper vagina, cervix and body of the uterus.
From the internal iliac and common iliac nodes, afferent vessels pass up the para-aortic chains, and
finally all lymphatic drainage from the legs and pelvis flows into the lumbar lymphatic trunks and cisterna
chyli at the level of the second lumbar vertebra. From here, all the lymph is carried by the thoracic duct
through the thorax with no intervening nodes to empty into the junction of the left subclavian and internal
jugular veins.
Tumour cells that penetrate or bypass the pelvic and para-aortic nodes are rapidly disseminated via
the great veins at the root of the neck.

Lymphatic drainage from the genital tract
The lymph vessel from individual parts of the genital tract drain into this system of pelvic lymph nodes in
the following manner:
• The vulva and perineum medial to the labiocrural skin folds contain superficial lymphatics that pass
upwards towards the mons pubis, then curve laterally to the superficial and inguinal nodes. Drainage
from these is through the fossa ovalis into the deep femoral nodes. The largest of these, lying in the
upper part of the femoral canal, is known as the node of Cloquet.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• The lymphatics of the lower third of the vagina follow the vulval drainage to the superficial lymph
nodes, whereas those from the upper two-thirds pass upwards to join the lymphatic vessels of the
cervix.
• The lymphatics of the cervix pass either laterally in the base of the broad ligament or posteriorly along
the uterosacral ligaments to reach the side wall of the pelvis. Most of the vessels drain to the internal
iliac obturator and external iliac nodes, but vessels also pass directly to the common iliac and lower
para-aortic nodes. Radical surgery for carcinoma of the cervix should include removal of all these node
groups on both sides of the pelvis.
• Most of the lymphatic vessels of the body of the uterus join those of the cervix and therefore reach
similar groups of nodes. A few vessels at the fundus follow the ovarian channels and there is an
inconsistent pathway along the round ligament to the inguinal nodes.
• The ovary and Fallopian tube have a plexus of vessels that drain along the infundibulopelvic fold to the
para-aortic nodes on both sides of the midline. On the left, these are found around the left renal pedicle,
while on the right there may only be one node intervening before the lymph flows into the thoracic duct,
thus accounting for the rapid early spread of metastatic carcinoma to distant sites such as the lungs.
• The lymphatic drainage of the bladder and upper urethra is to the iliac nodes, while those of the lower
part of the urethra follow those of the vulva.
• Lymphatics from the lower anal canal drain to the superficial inguinal nodes and the remainder of the
rectal drainage follows pararectal channels accompanying the blood vessels to both the internal iliac
nodes (middle rectal artery) and the para-aortic nodes and the origin of the inferior mesenteric artery.

The nerves (Figure 1.8)
Nerve supply of the vulva and perineum
The pudendal nerve arises from the second, third and fourth sacral nerves. As it passes along the outer
wall of the ischiorectal fossa, it gives off an inferior rectal branch and divides into the perineal nerve and
dorsal nerve of the clitoris. The perineal nerve gives the sensory supply to the vulva and also innervates
the anterior part of the external anal canal and the levator ani and the superficial perineal muscles. The
dorsal nerve of the clitoris is sensory. Sensory fibres from the mons and labia also pass in the ilioinguinal
and genitofemoral nerves to the first lumbar root. The posterior femoral cutaneous nerve carries sensation
from the perineum to the small sciatic nerve and thus to the first, second and third sacral nerves. The main
nerve supply of the levator ani muscles comes from the third and fourth sacral nerves.

Nerve supply of the pelvic viscera
The innervation of the pelvic viscera is complex and not well understood. All pelvic viscera receive dual
innervation (i.e both sympathetic and parasympathetic). Nerve fibres of the preaortic plexus of the
sympathetic nervous system are continuous with those of the superior hypogastric plexus, which lies in
front of the last lumber vertebra and is wrongly called the ‘presacral nerve’. Below this, the superior
hypogastric plexus divides and on each side its fibres are continuous with fibres passing beside the
rectum to join the uterovaginal plexus (inferior hypogastric plexus or plexus of Frankenhauser). This
plexus lies in the loose cellular tissue posterolateral to the cervix, below the uterosacral folds of
peritoneum. Parasympathetic fibres from the second, third and fourth sacral nerves join the uterovaginal
plexus. Fibres from (or to) the bladder, uterus, vagina and rectum join the plexus. The uterovaginal plexus
www.medicalebookpdf.com

contains a few ganglion cells, so it is likely that a few motor cells also have their relay stations there and
then pass onward with the blood vessels onto the viscera.

Figure 1.8 Nerve supply of the pelvis and perineum.
The ovary is not innervated by the nerves already described, but from the ovarian plexus that
surrounds the ovarian vessels and joins the preaortic plexus high up.

KEY LEARNING POINTS
• An adult uterus consists of three layers: the peritoneum, myometrium and endometrium.
• The cervix is narrower than the body of the uterus and is approximately 2.5 cm in length. The ureter
runs about 1 cm lateral to the cervix.
• The ovary is the only intraperitoneal structure not covered by peritoneum.
• The main supports to the pelvic floor are the connective tissue and levator ani muscles. The main
supports of the uterus are the uterosacral and cardinal ligaments, which are condensations of
connective tissue.
• The ovarian arteries arise directly from the aorta, while the right ovarian vein drains into the vena
cava and the left into the left renal vein.
• The major nerve supply of the pelvis comes from the pudendal nerves, which arise from the
second, third and fourth sacral nerves.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Structural problems of pelvic organs
Müllerian anomalies
These are common, occurring in up to 6% of the female population, and may be asymptomatic. The
aetiology is unknown, although associated renal anomalies are present in up to 30%. Several
classifications are used that have relevance to the clinical management. Figure 1.9 represents the
classification used in Europe.

Müllerian obstruction
Failure of complete canalization of the Müllerian structures can lead to menstrual obstruction. The
obstruction most commonly occurs at the junction of the lower third of the vagina at the level of the
hymen, although more proximal obstruction can occur. Presentation with an imperforate hymen is usually
with increasing abdominal pain in a girl in early adolescence. The retained menstrual blood stretches the
vagina, causing a haematocolpus. This can cause a large pelvic mass and in addition can usually be seen
as a bulging membrane at the vaginal entrance. Treatment is simple with a surgical incision of the hymen
and drainage of the retained blood.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 1.9 Müllerian structural abnormalities.

Müllerian duplication
Duplication of the Müllerian system can occur, resulting in a wide range of anomalies. It may be a
complete duplication of the uterus, cervix and vagina, but may be simply a midline uterine septum in
otherwise normal internal genitalia. Second uterine horns may also occur and can be rudimentary or
functional.

Müllerian agenesis
In approximately 1 in 5,000 to 1 in 40,000 girls, the Müllerian system does not develop, resulting in an
absent or rudimentary uterus and upper vagina. This condition is known as Rokitansky syndrome or
Mayer–Rokitansky–Kuster–Hauser syndrome (MRKH). The ovaries function normally and so the most
common presentation is with primary amenorrhoea in the presence of otherwise normal pubertal
development. The aetiology of this condition is not known, although possible factors include
environmental, genetic, hormonal or receptor factors. On examination, the vagina will be blind ending and
is likely to be shortened in length. An ultrasound scan will confirm the presence of ovaries, but no
functioning uterus will be present.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Treatment options focus on psychological support and on the creation of a vagina comfortable for
penetrative intercourse, as discussed in Chapter 3, Hormonal control of the menstrual cycle and hormonal
disorders. There is currently no treatment available to transplant a uterus in humans, although there is
extensive ongoing research being undertaken in this area. Women with MRKH syndrome may have their
own genetic children, using ovum retrieval and assisted conception techniques, and a surrogate mother.

Vestigial structures
Vestigial remains of the mesonephric duct and tubules are always present in young children, but are
variable structures in adults. The epoophoron, a series of parallel blind tubules, lies in the broad ligament
between the mesovarium and the Fallopian tube. The tubules run to the rudimentary duct of the
epoophoron, which runs parallel to the lateral Fallopian tube. Situated in the broad ligament between the
epoophoron and the uterus, a few rudimentary tubules are occasionally seen, the paroophoron. In a few
individuals, the caudal part of the mesonephric duct is well developed, running alongside the uterus to the
internal os. This is the duct of Gartner.

Further reading
Netter FH (2011) Atlas Of Human Anatomy. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders/Elsevier.
Setchell M, Hudson CN (2013) Shaw’s Textbook Of Operative Gynaecology. New Delhi: Elsevier.

Self assessment
CASE HISTORY
A 15-year-old girl was seen in gynaecology clinic with her mother. She had not yet started her
periods. She described breast development at age 12 and pubic hair development. All her friends
had started their periods and she wondered what was wrong.
She also described abdominal pain that had started a couple of years ago. Initially she had
ignored it but now it was interfering with sport. It was intermittent and on questioning she wondered
if it was coming about monthly. It was a cramping lower abdominal pain.
She had a boyfriend but was not sexually active. Medically there were no problems, no previous
operations and no allergies. Socially she was doing well at school.
On examination there was normal breast development and distribution of pubic hair. There was a
hard swelling in the lower abdomen that was quite tender. On observation of the genitalia, a blue
swelling at the level of the hymen was seen.
A What is the most likely diagnosis?
B Which investigations(s) should be performed and what is the differential diagnosis?

ANSWERS

www.medicalebookpdf.com

A The most likely diagnosis is a haematocolpos from an imperforate hymen. Menstrual fluid had
been collecting above the hymen as it could not escape. Over time this had distended the vagina
and filled the uterine cavity. This was causing the swelling and the cyclical pain.
B An ultrasound should be performed to confirm the diagnosis and exclude any Müllerian structural
alterations. The important differential is obstruction due to a horizontal vaginal plate at a higher
level. In this case the ultrasound would not show blood filling the vagina down to the introitus
because the site of an imperforate plate is higher in the vagina and is due to imperforate urogenital
sinus. The additional finding of the blue vaginal swelling also points to the hymen being the level
of obstruction.
The girl was admitted for day case surgery. An incision was made in the hymen under general
anaesthetic. 700 ml of old blood was evacuated. She made a good recovery and her periods
commenced shortly afterwards.

SBA QUESTIONS
1 Which of the following statements is true about the round ligament? Choose the single best answer.
A The round ligament lies posterior to the uterus.
B The round ligament supports the fundus of the uterus.
C The round ligament is a vestigial structure.
D The round ligament ends distally in the inguinal canal.
E The round ligament contains the neuromuscular bundle supplying the ovary.
ANSWER
D The round ligament lies anterior to the uterus. It does not physically support the uterus and is not a
vestigial structure. It runs from the cornu of the uterus from the anterior leaf of the broad ligament,
to the inguinal canal. The round ligament does not contain the vascular bundle of the ovary; this
runs in the mesovarian.
2 Which of the following statements is true about the Fallopian tube? Choose the single best answer.
A The Fallopian tube is 20 cm long.
B The Fallopian tube has a glandular submucosa.
C The Fallopian tube is independent of hormonal influence.
D The Fallopian tube is lined by ciliated epithelium.
E The Fallopian tube lies in the round ligament.
ANSWER
www.medicalebookpdf.com

D The Fallopian tube is about 10 cm long. It runs in the upper margin of the broad ligament. The
epithelium is responsive to hormones and has two types of cell: ciliated and secretory cells. There
is no submucosa nor glands.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

www.medicalebookpdf.com

CHAPTER 2

Gynaecological history, examination and
investigations
HELEN BICKERSTAFF

History
Examination
Investigations
Further reading
Self assessment

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
• To understand that a detailed and structured gynaecological history is vital for making a diagnosis,
and will place the patient’s symptoms in her social context.
• To understand that the gynaecological examination will be customized by the history to elicit the
appropriate signs.
• Imaging in gynaecology may include ultrasound, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed
tomography (CT) scanning.
• Biochemical, haematological and microbiological investigations will be guided by the history and
examination findings.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

History
The gynaecological consultation should ideally be held in a closed room with adequate facilities and
privacy. Some women will feel anxious or apprehensive about the forthcoming consultation, so it is
important that the student or doctor establishes initial rapport with the patient and puts them at ease. The
practitioner should introduce themselves by name and status, and should check the patient’s details.
Ideally, there should be no more than one other person in the room, but any student or attending nurse
should be introduced by name and their role briefly explained.
A number of women attend with their partner, close family member or friend. Provided the patient
herself consents to this, there is no reason to exclude them from the initial consultation, but this should be
limited to one person. In some instances, the additional person may be required to be a key part of the
consultation (i.e. if there is a language or comprehension difficulty). However, an independent interpreter
should always be used to ensure the patient’s best interests are being presented. At least some part of the
consultation or examination should be with the woman alone, to allow her to answer any specific queries
more openly.
eResource 2.1
The gynaecological consultation
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv2.1.php
It is important to be aware of the different attitudes to women’s health issues in a religious and
culturally diverse population. Appropriate respect and sensitivity should always be shown.
Enough time should be allowed for the patient to express herself and the doctor’s manner should be
one of interest and understanding, while guiding her with appropriate questioning. A history that is taken
with sensitivity will often encourage the patient to reveal more details that may be relevant to future
management. While there are number of terms used in gynaecology (Box 2.1), care should be taken to
avoid medicalized language, using lay terms where possible.
A set template should be used for history taking, as this prevents the omission of important points and
will help direct the consultation (Box 2.2). Some clinics employ a template routinely to ensure all
questions are covered.

Social history
Sensitive enquiry should be made about the woman’s social situation including details of her occupation,
who she lives with, her housing and whether or not she is in a stable relationship. A history regarding
smoking and alcohol intake should also be obtained. Any pertinent family or other relevant social
problems should be briefly discussed. If admission and surgery are being contemplated it is necessary to
establish what support the woman has at home, particularly if she is elderly or frail.

Box 2.1 Glossary
Menarche

Start of menstruation
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Last menstrual
period (LMP)

Date of last menstrual bleed

Amenorrhoea

Absence of bleeds for more than 6 months in women of reproductive age, see
Chapter 3, Hormonal control of the menstrual cycle and hormonal disorders

Oligomenorrhoea

Infrequent menstrual bleeds more than 35 days apart, see Chapter 3, Hormonal
control of the menstrual cycle and hormonal disorders

Dysmenorrhoea

Painful menstrual bleeding (primary or secondary) see Chapter 4, Disorders of
menstrual bleeding

Menorrhagia

Now called heavy menstrual bleeding (HMB), see Chapter 4, Disorders of
menstrual bleeding

Abnormal uterine Includes postcoital bleeding (PCB)/intermenstrual bleeding (IMB), see Chapter 4,
bleeding (AUB) Disorders of menstrual bleeding
Dyspareunia

Painful intercourse, superficial or deep, see Chapter 13, Benign conditions of the
vulva and vagina, psychosexual disorders and female genital mutilation

Incontinence

Involuntary loss of urine, stress, urge or mixed, see Chapter 10 Urogynaecology
and pelvic floor problems

Prolapse

Feeling of something coming down in the vagina, see Chapter 10, Urogynaecology
and pelvic floor problems

Box 2.2 Template for gynaecological history taking in suggested
order
1 General
Name, age and occupation.
A brief statement of the general nature and duration of the main complaints (try to use the patient’s
own words rather than medical terms at this stage).
2 History of presenting complaint
This section should focus on the presenting complaint (e.g. menstrual problems, pain, subfertility,
urinary incontinence, etc).
3 Menstrual history
This will be explored in all patients except menopausal women:
• usual duration of each period and length of full cycle (how many days from day 1 of bleed to day 1
of next bleed);
• first day of the LMP;
• pattern of bleeding: regular or irregular and length of cycle;
• amount of blood loss: patients will have different ideas as to what constitutes a ‘heavy period’.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

4 Cervical screening
This will be explored in all patients:
• date of last smear, its outcome and any previous abnormalities, colposcopy or treatments.
5 Sexual and contraceptive history
• present partner(s), sexual orientation;
• contraceptive method or needs.
6 Other gynaecological symptoms
A brief exploration of the following complaints should follow. The detailed questions relating to each
complaint are explained in more detail later:
• any irregular bleeding?
• any HMB, IMB, PCB?
• any pelvic pain?
• any problems with fertility?
• any problems with continence?
• any dyspareunia or sexual difficulty?
• any vaginal discharge?
• menopausal history and use of HRT.
7 Previous gynaecological history
This section should include any previous gynaecological treatments or surgery.
Previous obstetric history:
• number of children with ages and birthweights, mode of delivery and any complications;
• number of miscarriages and gestation at which they occurred;
• any terminations of pregnancy with record of gestational age and any complications.
8 Previous medical history
• any serious illnesses or operations with dates.
9 Medication and allergies
• allergies: including to what and the reaction;
• current/previous medications tried.
10 Family history
Significant autoimmune disease, BRAC related cancers and thrombophilias.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

11 Systems enquiry
• appetite, weight loss, weight gain;
• bowel function (if urogynaecological complaint, more detail may be required);
• bladder function (if urogynaecological complaint, more detail may be required).

Box 2.3 How to determine if there is HMB
• Is the bleeding more or less than usual?
• Do you use tampons, towels or both?
• How often does soaked sanitary wear need to be changed?
• Is there presence of clots?
• Is the bleeding so heavy (flooding) that it spills over your towel/tampon and onto your pants, clothes
or bedding?
• Have you had to take any time off work due to this bleeding?
• Do you ever find you are confined to your house when the bleeding is at its worst?
• Do you feel dizzy or short of breath, particularly after a period, or find it hard to climb stairs?
• Does it constrain your lifestyle?
Specific gynaecological problems require more focussed history taking, and the questions to be
asked are detailed below.

Abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB) (see Chapter 4, Disorders of
menstrual bleeding)
• Length of time of problem.
• Amount of blood loss.
• Relationships of bleeding to sex and to menstrual cycle, or to the last menstrual bleed in the case of
postmenopausal bleeding (PMB).
• For HMB the objective measurement is difficult, see Box 2.3.

Early pregnancy problems (see Chapter 5, Implantation and early
pregnancy)
• Date of LMP, whether it was normal and the regularity of cycle are used to establish likely gestation.
• Whether contraception used and whether the patient plans to proceed with pregnancy if unintended.
• Pregnancy symptoms.
• Episodes of bleeding or pain in this pregnancy.
• Whether a scan has already been performed to establish viability and site of the pregnancy.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• Whether there are risk factors for an ectopic pregnancy (sexually-transmitted infection [STI], delayed
conception, previous ectopics).
• Previous history of miscarriages, the gestation and their management (surgical, medical, conservative).

Contraception and emergency contraception (EC) (see Chapter 6,
Contraception and abortion)
• LMP.
• Exact timing of unprotected intercourse(s) if requires EC.
• Contraindications to oestrogen-based contraception (thromboembolism, obesity, smoking, age,
migraines with aura).
• Regular or multiple partners.
• Previous sexual health screening.
• Other menstrual problems (which may be improved with certain forms of contraception).

Fertility (see Chapter 7, Subfertility)
• Length of time in present relationship using no contraception.
• Length of time ‘trying for pregnancy’.
• Previous tests performed, both male and female.
• Previous STIs.
• Previous fertility treatments attempted.
• Particular attention to length and regularity of menstrual cycle.
• Evidence of uterine problems (HMB, scanty periods, previous surgery, abdominal fullness).
• Evidence of polycystic ovary syndrome (oligomenorrhoea, hirsutism, excess weight, acne).
• Evidence of endocrine problems such as thyroid symptoms (heat sensitivity, weight change, tremor),
prolactinomas (galactorrhea, visual field disturbance, headaches).

Menopause (see Chapter 8, The menopause and postreproductive
health)
• Date of last period.
• PMB.
• Evidence of any menopausal symptoms (such as hot flushes, sleep disturbance, emotional or
psychological difficulty, sexual difficulty, vaginal dryness, bladder symptoms).
• Any hormone replacement therapy (HRT) taken now or previously and any specific cautions such as
breast cancer, thromboembolic events, hypertension.

Urogynaecology (see Chapter 10, Urogynaecology and pelvic floor
problems)
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• Number of times passing urine during the day and at night.
• Difficulty in passing urine.
• Uncontrolled passage of urine on coughing or straining.
• Urgent need to pass urine and loss of urine with urge.
• Exacerbating factors such as alcohol, caffeine.
• Extent to which affects general life such as fluid restricting or planning routes around toilet facilities.
• Incontinence of flatus or faeces.
• Incontinence during sexual intercourse.
• Feeling of something coming down in vagina.
• Risk factors such as number of pregnancies and vaginal and instrumental births.
• Evidence of abdominal masses such as fibroids.
• Menopausal status and HRT.

Sexual health (see Chapter 9, Genitourinary medicine)
• Present sexual partner, regular or not and other partners.
• Vaginal/anal/oral sex.
• Contraception.
• Previous contraception and sexual partners.
• Previous sexual health screening.
• Previous STIs.
• Symptoms of vaginal discharge, its colour and odour.
• Vaginal and perineal discomfort or itching or lesions.

Pelvic pain (see Chapter 11, Benign conditions of the ovary and
pelvis)
• Site of pain, its nature and severity.
• Anything that aggravates or relieves the pain – specifically enquire about temporal relationship to
menstrual cycle and intercourse.
• Does the pain radiate anywhere or is it associated with bowel or bladder function?
• Is there pain having intercourse and is this deep or superficial and is there associated sexual dysfunction
(see Chapter 13, Benign conditions of the vulva and vagina, psychosexual disorders and female genital
mutilation)?

Summary
The history should be summarized in one to two sentences before proceeding to the examination to focus
the problem and alert the examiner to the salient features.
• Privacy and confidentiality are essential in gynaecological history taking.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• It is important to avoid medical language.
• The symptoms experienced by the patient and the relevance in their lives are both important.
• A systematic and thorough gynaecological history should be asked at each consultation.
• Specific areas of the history should then be explored.

Box 2.4 Sample history
This 32-year-old Afro-Caribbean lady has presented to gynaecology with heavy regular periods. She
uses eight towels a day and floods at night. She has symptoms of anaemia. Her periods became
heavier 3 years ago. There is no abnormal pain. She has also noted abdominal fullness and frequency
of urine during the day.
Her last smear test was 2 years ago and was normal. She has had two full term normal deliveries,
her children are aged 6 and 10. She uses condoms with her regular partner for contraception. She
would like more children in a few years time. She has had no STIs. She has had no previous surgery
and is fit and well, takes no medication, and has no allergies.

Examination
Important information about the patient can be obtained by watching them walk into the examination room.
Poor mobility may affect decisions regarding surgery or future management. Any examination should
always be carried out with the patient’s consent and with appropriate privacy and sensitivity. Check and
explain that the door is closed, check the patient’s comfort (e.g. is an elderly patient comfortable without
the head being raised, is she warm enough) before proceeding. A female chaperone must be present
throughout the examination.
It is good practice to perform a general examination, which should include examining the hands and
mucous membranes for evidence of anaemia. The supraclavicular area should be palpated for the
presence of nodes, particularly on the left side where in cases of abdominal malignancy one might palpate
the enlarged Virchow’s node (this is also known as Troissier’s sign). The thyroid gland should be
palpated. The breasts should be examined as part of the examination if indicated by the history or pelvic
examination; this is particularly relevant if there is a suspected ovarian mass, as there may be a breast
tumour with secondaries in the ovaries known as Krukenburg tumours. In addition, a pleural effusion may
be elicited as a consequence of abdominal ascites.
Blood pressure and body mass index (BMI) should be recorded as this will be relevant to medical and
surgical management.

Abdominal examination
The patient should empty her bladder before the abdominal examination for comfort. If a urine infection or
pregnancy is suspected, a sample should be tested. The patient should be comfortable and lying semirecumbent with a sheet covering her from the waist down, but the area from the xiphisternum to the
symphysis pubis should be left exposed (Figure 2.1). Palpation is traditionally performed while standing
on the right-hand side of the patient using the right hand. Abdominal examination comprises inspection,
palpation, percussion and, if appropriate, auscultation.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Inspection
The contour of the abdomen should be inspected and noted. There may be an obvious distension or mass.
The presence of surgical scars, dilated veins or striae gravidarum (stretch marks) should be noted. It is
important specifically to examine the umbilicus for laparoscopy scars and just above the symphysis pubis
for Pfannenstiel scars (used for caesarean section, hysterectomy, etc). The patient should be asked to raise
her head or cough and any hernias or divarication of the rectus muscles will be evident.

Palpation
First, if the patient has any abdominal pain she should be asked to point to the site – the area should not be
examined until the end of palpation. Palpation is performed examining the left lower quadrant and
proceeding in a total of four steps to the right lower quadrant of the abdomen. Palpation should include
examination for masses, the liver, spleen and kidneys. If a mass is present but one can palpate below it,
then it is more likely to be an abdominal mass rather than a pelvic mass. It is important to remember that
one of the characteristics of a pelvic mass is that it arises from the pelvis, hence one cannot palpate
below it. If the patient has pain, her abdomen should be palpated gently and the examiner should look for
signs of peritonism (i.e. guarding and rebound tenderness). The patient should also be examined for
inguinal hernias and lymph nodes.

Figure 2.1 A patient in the correct position for abdominal examination, showing obvious abdominal
distension.

Percussion
Percussion is particularly useful if free fluid is suspected. In the recumbent position, ascitic fluid will
settle down into a horseshoe shape and dullness in the flanks can be demonstrated. As the patient moves
over to her side, the dullness will move to her lowermost side. This is known as ‘shifting dullness’. A
fluid thrill can also be elicited. An enlarged bladder due to urinary retention will also be dull to
percussion.

Auscultation
This method is not specifically useful for the routine gynaecological examination. However, a patient will
sometimes present with an acute abdomen, with bowel obstruction or a postoperative patient with ileus,
and in this situation listening for bowel sounds will be appropriate.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Pelvic examination
Before proceeding to a vaginal examination, the patient’s verbal consent should be obtained and a female
chaperone should be present for any intimate examination. It is good practice (and common in most UK
medical schools) for a student to have written consent. This is mandatory if the patient will be under
anaesthetic for the examination. Non-sterile gloves can be used for the examination unless the patient is
pregnant, in which case sterile gloves should be worn. There are three components to the pelvic
examination.

Inspection
The external genitalia and surrounding skin, including the perianal area, are first inspected under a good
light with the patient in the dorsal position, the hips flexed and abducted and knees flexed (Figure 2.2).
The patient is asked to cough or bear down to enable signs of a prolapse or stress incontinence. Abnormal
signs such as skin discolouration, lumps, scars from previous episiotomy, deficient perineum or prolapse
(see Chapter 10, Urogynaecology and pelvic floor problems) are noted. Female genital mutilation (FGM)
(see Chapter 13, Benign conditions of the vulva and vagina, psychosexual disorders and female genital
mutilation) should be described.

Speculum
A sterile speculum is an instrument that is inserted into the vagina to obtain a clearer view of part of the
vagina or pelvic organs. There are two principal types in widespread use. The first is a bivalve or
Cusco’s speculum (Figure 2.3A), which holds back the anterior and posterior walls of the vagina and
allows visualization of the cervix when opened out (Figure 2.3B). It has a retaining screw that can be
tightened to allow the speculum to stay in place while a procedure or sample is taken from the cervix (e.g.
smear or swab). A Sim’s speculum (Figure 2.4A) may also be used for examination of prolapse as it
allows inspection of the vaginal walls. It is used in the left lateral position (Figure 2.4B). The choice of
speculum will depend on the patient’s presenting problem.
Excessive lubrication should be avoided and if a smear is being taken, lubrication with anything other
than water should be avoided as it may interfere with the analysis. Microbiology swabs are taken from the
vaginal fornices. Endocervical swabs for chlamydia are taken from the endocervical canal (see Chapter
9, Genitourinary problems).

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 2.2 The normal vulva.

Figure 2.3 A: Cusco’s speculum; B: Cusco’s speculum in position. The speculum should be inserted at
about 45° to the vertical and rotated to the vertical as it is introduced. Once it is fully inserted, the blades
should be opened up to visualize the cervix.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 2.4 A: Sim’s speculum; B: Sim’s speculum inserted with the patient in the left lateral position. The
speculum is being used to hold back the posterior vaginal walls to allow inspection of the anterior wall
and vault. The speculum can be rotated 180° or withdrawn slowly to visualize the posterior wall.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 2.5 A: Bimanual examination of the pelvis assessing the uterine position and size; B: bimanual
examination of the lateral fornix.

Bimanual examination
This is usually performed after the speculum examination and is performed to assess the pelvic organs. It
is a technique that requires practice. There are a variety of ‘model pelvises’ that can be used to train the
student in the basics of the examination. Most UK medical schools employ gynaecology teaching
associates (GTAs), who are trained in teaching communication about pelvic examination and use their
own bodies to teach the examination process and give feedback. It is customary to use the left hand to part
the labia and expose the vestibule and then insert one or two fingers of the right hand into the vagina. The
fingers are passed upwards and backwards to reach the cervix (Figure 2.5A). The cervix is palpated and
any irregularity, hardness or tenderness noted. The left hand is now placed on the abdomen above the
pubic symphysis and pressed down into the pelvis to palpate the fundus of the uterus. The size, shape,
position, mobility, consistency and tenderness are noted. The normal uterus is pear-shaped and about 9 cm
in length. It is usually anteverted with the angle of the axis falling forward (see Chapter 1, The
development and anatomy of the female sexual organs and pelvis), and normally freely mobile and nonwww.medicalebookpdf.com

tender. The tips of the fingers are then placed into each lateral fornix to palpate the adenexae (tubes and
ovaries) on each side. The fingers are pushed backwards and upwards, while at the same time pushing
down in the corresponding area with the fingers of the abdominal hand. It is unusual to be able to feel
normal ovaries. Any swelling or tenderness is noted (Figure 2.5B). The posterior fornix should also be
palpated to identify the uterosacral ligaments, which may be tender or scarred in women with
endometriosis.

Box 2.5 Version and flexion of the uterus
The position as well as the size of the uterus is very important in any patient requiring any type of
intrauterine instrumentation (contraceptive coil insertion, hysteroscopy, laparoscopy). The reason for
this is the instrument will be guided into the uterus along its axis. It takes some experience to get this
correct. If an acutely retroflexed uterus is missed, perforation through the anterior wall with surgical
instruments is more likely. If an acutely anteverted uterus is missed, posterior perforation is likely.
The size of an enlarged uterus is described in terms of the size of the uterus in weeks of gestation,
for example a ‘6 weeks size uterus’ is a non-pregnant uterus of the size associated with 6 weeks’
pregnancy, about the size of a small orange. For very large uteri it can be useful to describe by
abdominal landmarks, for example to umbilicus or xiphisternum.

Rectal examination
In some situations, a rectal examination with specific additional consent can be useful in addition to a
vaginal examination to differentiate between an enterocele and a rectocele or to palpate the uterosacral
ligaments more thoroughly. Occasionally, a rectovaginal examination (index finger in the vagina and
middle finger in the rectum) may be useful to identify a lesion in the rectovaginal septum.

Box 2.6 Global context
A rectal examination can be used as an alternative to a vaginal examination in children and in adults
who have never had sex, if ultrasound is not available as an investigation. It is less sensitive than a
vaginal examination and can be quite uncomfortable, but it will help pick up a pelvic mass.
FGM may be encountered in women of sub-Saharan origin. The presence and type must be
recorded. In some cases this will make vaginal examination impossible. The presence of FGM must
be recorded in the case notes as a legal requirement.
Some cultures would prohibit examination by a male practitioner except in cases of emergency.

Box 2.7 Professionalism
• Pelvic examination is classed by the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG) as
an ‘intimate examination’ and as such should be taught initially by simulation, and thereafter with
consent.
• Written consent by a student should be taken prior to examination under anaesthetic for teaching
practice.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• An explanation of the necessity and procedure of vaginal examination should be given.
• A female chaperone must be present.

Summary
• The size and consistency of the pelvic organs may indicate the diagnosis and need for further
investigations.
• Accurate determination of anteversion or retroversion of the uterus is crucial immediately prior to
operations that require dilation of the uterine cervix to reduce the chance of perforation. This takes
experience.
• Extreme reluctance to a vaginal examination, even with a qualified female doctor, should alert the
practitioner to psychological issues that should be explored.
• Some women will be reluctant to be examined while bleeding. They should be reassured and
encouraged if this is part of the presenting complaint. Some women will prefer to return when not
bleeding.

Investigations
Once the examination is complete, the patient should be given the opportunity to dress in privacy and
come back into the consultation room to sit down and discuss the findings. You should now be able to
give a summary of the whole case and formulate a differential diagnosis. This will then determine the
appropriate further investigations (if any) that should be needed. Swabs and smears and urine sample will
have been taken earlier in the examination. The urine should be kept and checked for beta-HCG if
intrauterine examination is required. Further tests are outlined later in this chapter.

Imaging
Ultrasound imaging in gynaecology has become uniformly available in the UK. Basic competence in
gynaecological ultrasound is part of the RCOG Curriculum for Training Doctors. Ultrasound imaging of
the uterus and adnexa is part of the investigations of nearly all gynaecological problems, perhaps with the
exception of contraception and sexual health screening in asymptomatic women.
Pelvic ultrasound using a transvaginal ultrasound scan (TVUSS) is performed for adult women and is
the investigation of choice for most problems. The probe is cleaned in the presence of the patient and
covered with a probe cover (or commonly a latex-free condom), containing ultrasound gel on the inside
and outside. The probe is inserted into the vagina while the images are viewed on a screen. The images
can be shared with the patient once the correct image has been determined. The presence of pain and the
correlation with images can be useful diagnostically. The resolution of TVUSS is high, particularly if the
organ lies close to the probe, and the depth of images visible is around 12 cm. Excellent images of the
uterus and adnexa, including the internal architecture of the myometrium, endometrium, Fallopian tubes
when abnormal and ovaries are achievable (Figure 2.6A, 2.6B, 2.6B and D), as well as images of early
intrauterine pregnancies. For women who have not been sexually active, children and teenagers and some
elderly women, an abdominal ultrasound is more appropriate. In some women with a large pelvic mass
both types of ultrasound may be utilized.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Box 2.8 Clinical context
• Ultrasound imaging of the pelvic organs has become part of routine assessment in gynaecology in the
UK, but should not replace pelvic examination.
• TVUSS has excellent resolution and is inexpensive, and can enable accurate and instant diagnosis of
most gynaecological problems, including acute and early pregnancy problems.
• The availability of ultrasound before or during a gynaecological consultation can often avoid the
need for a patient to return to see the practitioner.
• Uterine and ovarian pathologies have specific appearances and can be diagnosed with accuracy.
• More expensive tests such as MRI are usually not needed in gynaecology. Increasingly, 3D
ultrasound is used to diagnose uterine and adnexal abnormalities.
• Increased BMI can cause difficulty in visualization

Figure 2.6
eResource 2.2
Ultrasound imaging in gynaecology
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv2.2.php
Instillation of saline through the cervix (saline instillation sonography, SIS) allows distension of the
cavity of the uterus to enable the detection of abnormalities such as endometrial polyps and submucosal
fibroids. 3D TVUSS improves the ability to diagnose structural abnormalities in the uterus.
T2-weighted MRI, although expensive, may be requested to distinguish fibroid change from
adenomysosis and to delineate ovarian cysts and assess malignancy. It can also be used to identify
structural abnormalities in the genital tract (Figure 2.7A, 2.7B and C). Increasingly, expert 3D TVUSS is
used as a cheaper alternative. When malignancy has been identified CT may be indicated to determine the
stage of the disease.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 2.6 A: Transvaginal ultrasound (TVUSS) of normal uterus. B: TVUSS of left and right ovaries; C:
TVUSS of haemorrhagic cyst; D: TVUSS of multiseptated cyst.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 2.7 A: Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of normal pelvis (long arrow, endometrium; short
arrow, inner myometrium and cervix; arrowhead, outer myometrium); B: axial MRI of pelvis in a patient
with uterus didelphys and double cervices (long arrows, ovaries; short arrows, cervices; arrowhead,
follicle). C: coronal MRI in a patient with uterus didelphys (long arrow, right ovary; short arrows,
cervices). (Images courtesy of Dr Sarah Natas, Consultant Radiologist.)

Endometrial biopsy
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Biopsy of the endometrium can be performed without anaesthetic in most women, and is indicated for
some women over 45 with menstrual symptoms, including HMB and PCB, after ensuring that the woman
is not pregnant (see Chapter 4, Disorders of menstrual bleeding) (Figure 2.8 and Box 2.9). Endometrial
biopsy is complemented by TVUSS, and outpatient or inpatient hysteroscopy and guided biopsy, where
indicated.
In addition to imaging and histology there are a number of investigations that are common in
gynaecology (Table 2.1).

Table 2.1 Common investigations in gynaecology

Figure 2.8 Endometrial sampler.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Box 2.9 Perfoming an endometrial biopsy
An endometrial biopsy can be performed in the outpatient setting. It is performed as follows:
• Speculum examination is carried out and the cervix is completely visualized.
• A vulsellum instrument may be required to grasp the cervix and provide gentle traction, thereby
straightening the endocervical canal.
• The endometrial sampler is carefully inserted through the cervical os until it reaches the fundus of
the uterus. The length of the uterus is noted.
• The inner part of the sampler is withdrawn to create a vacuum and the device is gently moved in and
out to obtain a sample of endometrial tissue.
• The sampler is removed and the tissue is expelled into a histopathology container of formalin.

KEY LEARNING POINTS
• The consultation should be performed in a private environment and in a sensitive fashion.
• The practitioner should introduce him/herself, be courteous and explain what is about to happen
and why.
• The practitioner should be familiar with the history template and use it regularly to avoid
omissions.
• Remember to summarize the history to the patient before proceeding to the examination.
• A female chaperone should always be present for an intimate examination.
• The practitioner should be sensitive to the patient’s needs and anxiety and respect her privacy and
dignity.
• The examination should always begin with a general assessment of the patient.
• The patient should be asked to inform the practitioner if the examination is uncomfortable.
• The practitioner should reassure the patient during the examination and give feedback about what is
being done.
• After the examination, the practitioner should make sure that the patient is comfortable and allow
her to get dressed in privacy.
• The practitioner should explain the findings to the patient in suitable language and give her the
opportunity to ask questions.
• Prepare a differential diagnosis and order any appropriate investigations.
• TVUSS scanning is inexpensive and accurate to aid diagnosis of most gynaecological conditions.
• Further imaging modalities may be used to aid more complex diagnoses.
• Biochemistry and haematology may complete these findings plus smear/swabs/urine.
• Histological specimens from endometrial or superficial biopsy may be required.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Further reading
RCOG Training in Ultrasound. https://www.rcog.org.uk/en/careers-training.

Self assessment
CASE HISTORY
A 32-year-old Afro-Caribbean teacher has come to clinic to see you. She has had increasingly heavy
periods over the last 18 months. Her periods are regular and there is no IMB or PCB, bleeding is for
5 days every 28 days. On the second and third day of bleeding she uses tampons and towels together,
which get soaked in blood within 1 hour. In classes she has had to run out when she had flooding,
and passed clots about 4 cm in size. This is really embarrassing with the school children and she has
taken to wearing nappies just in case. She is avoiding classroom teaching while she has a period but
can not explain why to her male head teacher. When her period finishes she feels ‘washed out’ and
gets short of breath exercising easily. She has not tried any treatment so far.
She has never been pregnant and hoped to get pregnant soon after her marriage last year, but
nothing has happened in the last 8 months. She has never had an STI, is in her only and stable sexual
relationship and has no abnormal vaginal discharge, and her smears have always been normal, the
last was 2 years ago.
On questioning she admits to feeling full in the abdomen when she lies on her stomach. There is
no pain as such and sex is not painful. She has never had surgery, has a healthy life style, does not
smoke or drink much alcohol and has no medical conditions. There is no family history of illnesses.
She is not allergic to any prescribed medicines.
On examination the abdomen is distended by a hard mass rising from the pelvis and coming half
way between the pubic symphysis and umbilicus. It is not tender. Cuscoe speculum shows that the
cervix is normal. Bimanual examination reveals the anteverted uterus to be enlarged to the size of a
grapefruit (about 12 weeks’ size for a pregnant uterus).
A What are the important parts of the history?
B Which investigations should be commenced?
C What treatment would you suggest?
ANSWERS
A Important parts of the history here are a clear history of menstrual disturbance and the time scale
over which it occurred. There are three issues: the heavy embarrassing periods, the likely
symptoms of anaemia and the desire to get pregnant so far without success. The healthy life style
and lack of previous surgery are important in case surgery is required. Lack of drug allergies is
very important to know for medications.
B Investigations should include:
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Full blood count to exclude anaemia. Without a personal or family history of thyroid disease,
biochemical thyroid function is not indicated. As the cycle is regular no other hormonal tests are
indicated at this stage.
Transvaginal ultrasound scan. The scan shows that the uterus is enlarged with fibroids. There are
three fibroids of which the largest is 6 cm × 8 cm at the fundus. There is a 2 cm × 2.5 cm
submucosal fibroid in the uterine cavity.
Smear or swabs are not required as there are no symptoms of discharge or IMB and last smear is
normal.
C Treatments should be discussed with the patient as described in later chapters. This patient will
benefit from a transcervical resection of her submucosal fibroid, which is probably causing both
her heavy menstrual bleeding and also her subfertility.

SBA QUESTION
1 A 32-year-old woman has come to the gynaecology clinic complaining of heavy menstrual
bleeding. On examination the uterus is anteverted and bulky. What is the best imaging modality to
further investigate her symptoms? Choose the single best answer.
A Abdominal ultrasound scan.
B CT.
C Hysterosalpingogram (HSG).
D MRI.
E TVUSS.
ANSWER
E TVUSS provides excellent resolution, is inexpensive and allows immediate diagnosis of uterine
and adnexal pathology.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

www.medicalebookpdf.com

CHAPTER 3

Hormonal control of the menstrual cycle and
hormonal disorders
HELEN BICKERSTAFF

Introduction
Physiology of the menstrual cycle
Puberty and secondary sexual development
Disorders of sexual development
Disorders of menstrual regularity
Further reading
Self assessment

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
• Describe the features of the normal menstrual cycle and the ovarian and endometrial changes that
accompany them.
• Describe the normal changes of puberty and the secondary sexual differentiation that accompanies
it.
• Understand the classification and causes of abnormal puberty and disorders of sexual development
(DSD).
• Describe the causes and investigation of primary and secondary amenorrhoea and
oligomenorrhoea.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• Understand the epidemiology and effects of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), its diagnosis and
management.
• Describe the common effects and management of premenstrual syndrome (PMS).
• Describe premature cessation of periods.

Introduction
This chapter considers hormonal control of the menstrual cycle and the abnormalities that may affect the
physiological initiation, regulation and cessation of the cycle. Abnormalities of uterine bleeding are the
subject of the next chapter.

Physiology of the menstrual cycle
The external manifestation of a normal menstrual cycle is the presence of regular vaginal bleeding. This
occurs as a result of the shedding of the endometrial lining following failure of fertilization of the oocyte
or failure of implantation. The cycle depends on changes occurring after puberty within the ovaries and
fluctuation in ovarian hormone levels, which are themselves controlled by the pituitary and hypothalamus
within the hypothalamo–pituitary–ovarian axis (HPO). In situations of DSD or hormonal abnormalities,
menstruation may not begin.

The hypothalamus
The hypothalamus in the forebrain secretes the peptide hormone gonadotrophin-releasing hormone
(GnRH), which in turn controls pituitary hormone secretion. GnRH must be released in a pulsatile fashion
to stimulate pituitary secretion of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH).

The pituitary gland
GnRH stimulation of the basophil cells in the anterior pituitary gland causes synthesis and release of the
gonadotrophic hormones FSH and LH. This process is modulated by the ovarian sex steroid hormones
oestrogen and progesterone. Low levels of oestrogen have an inhibitory effect on LH production (negative
feedback), whereas high levels of oestrogen will increase LH production (positive feedback). The
mechanism of action for the positive feedback effect of oestrogen involves an increase in GnRH receptor
concentrations, while the mechanism of the negative feedback effect is uncertain. The high levels of
circulating oestrogen in the late follicular phase of the ovary act via the positive-feedback mechanism to
generate a periovulatory LH surge from the pituitary.
The clinical relevance of these mechanisms is seen in the use of the combined oral contraceptive pill,
which artificially creates a constant serum oestrogen level in the negative-feedback range, inducing a
correspondingly low level of gonadotrophin hormone release.
Unlike oestrogen, low levels of progesterone have a positive-feedback effect on pituitary LH and FSH
secretion (as seen immediately prior to ovulation) and contribute to the LH and FSH surge. High levels of
www.medicalebookpdf.com

progesterone, as seen in the luteal phase, inhibit pituitary LH and FSH production. Positive-feedback
effects of progesterone occur via increasing sensitivity to GnRH in the pituitary. Negative-feedback
effects are generated through both decreased GnRH production from the hypothalamus and decreased
sensitivity to GnRH in the pituitary. It is known that progesterone can only have these effects on
gonadotropic hormone release after priming by oestrogen (Figure 3.1).

The ovary
Starting at menarche, the primordial follicles containing oocytes, arrested at the first prophase step in
meiotic division, will start to activate and grow in a cyclical fashion, causing ovulation and subsequent
menstruation in the event of non-fertilization. In the course of a normal menstrual cycle, the ovary will go
through three phases: follicular, ovulatory and luteal.

Figure 3.1 Hypothalamus–pituitary axis. (E2, oestrogen; FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; GnRH,
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone; LH, luteinizing hormone; P4, progesterone.)

Follicular phase
www.medicalebookpdf.com

The initial stages of follicular development are independent of hormone stimulation. However, follicular
development will fail at the preantral stage, and follicular atresia will ensue if pituitary hormones LH and
FSH are absent.
FSH levels rise in the first days of the menstrual cycle, when oestrogen, progesterone and inhibin
levels are low. This stimulates a cohort of small antral follicles on the ovaries to grow. Within the
follicles, there are two cell types that are involved in the processing of steroids, including oestrogen and
progesterone. These are the theca and the granulosa cells, which respond to LH and FSH stimulation,
respectively. LH stimulates production of androgens from cholesterol within theca cells. These androgens
are converted into oestrogens by the process of aromatization in granulosa cells, under the influence of
FSH.
As the follicles grow and oestrogen secretion increases, there is negative feedback on the pituitary to
decrease FSH secretion. This assists in the selection of one follicle to continue in its development
towards ovulation – the dominant follicle. In the ovary, the follicle that has the most efficient aromatase
activity and highest concentration of FSH-induced LH receptors will be the most likely to survive as FSH
levels drop, while smaller follicles will undergo atresia.
There are other autocrine and paracrine mediators playing a role in the follicular phase of the
menstrual cycle. These include inhibin and activin. Inhibin is secreted by the granulosa cells within the
ovaries. It participates in feedback to the pituitary to down-regulate FSH release, and also appears to
enhance ongoing androgen synthesis. Activin is structurally similar to inhibin, but has an opposite action.
It is produced in granulosa cells and in the pituitary, and acts to increase FSH binding on the follicles.
Insulin-like growth factors (IGF-I, IGF-II) act as paracrine regulators. Circulating levels do not change
during the menstrual cycle, but follicular fluid levels increase towards ovulation, with the highest level
found in the dominant follicle.
Kisspeptins are proteins that have more recently been found to play a role in regulation of the HPO
axis, via the mediation of the metabolic hormone leptin’s effect on the hypothalamus. Leptin is thought to
be key in the relationship between energy production, weight and reproductive health. Mutations in the
kisspeptin receptor, gpr-54, are associated with delayed or absent puberty, probably due to a reduction in
leptin-linked triggers for gonadotrophin release.

Ovulation
By the end of the follicular phase, which lasts an average of 14 days, the dominant follicle has grown to
approximately 20 mm in diameter. As the follicle matures, FSH induces LH receptors on the granulosa
cells to compensate for lower FSH levels and prepare for the signal for ovulation. Production of
oestrogen increases until it reaches the necessary threshold to exert a positive feedback effort on the
hypothalamus and pituitary to cause the LH surge. This occurs over 24–36 hours, during which time the
LH-induced luteinization of granulosa cells in the dominant follicle causes progesterone to be produced,
adding further to the positive feedback for LH secretion and causing a small periovulatory rise in FSH.
Androgens, synthesized in the theca cells, also rise around the time of ovulation, and this is thought to
have an important role in stimulating libido, ensuring that sexual activity is likely to occur at the time of
greatest fertility.
The LH surge is one of the best predictors of imminent ovulation, and this is the hormone detected in
urine by most over-the-counter ‘ovulation predictor’ tests. The LH surge has another function in
stimulating the resumption of meiosis in the oocyte just prior to its release. The physical ovulation of the
oocyte occurs after breakdown of the follicular wall takes place under the influence of LH, FSH and
proteolytic enzymes, such as plasminogen activators and prostaglandins (PGs). Studies have shown that
www.medicalebookpdf.com

inhibition of PG production may result in failure of ovulation. Thus, women wishing to become pregnant
should be advised to avoid taking PG synthetase inhibitors, such as aspirin and ibuprofen, which may
inhibit oocyte release.

Luteal phase
After the release of the oocyte, the remaining granulosa and theca cells on the ovary form the corpus
luteum (CL). The granulosa cells have a vacuolated appearance with accumulated yellow pigment, hence
the name CL (‘yellow body’). The CL undergoes extensive vascularization in order to supply granulosa
cells with a rich blood supply for continued steroidogenesis. This is aided by local production of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF).
Ongoing pituitary LH secretion and granulosa cell activity ensure a supply of progesterone, which
stabilizes the endometrium in preparation for pregnancy. Progesterone levels are at their highest in the
cycle during the luteal phase. This also has the effect of suppressing FSH and LH secretion to a level that
will not produce further follicular growth in the ovary during that cycle.
The luteal phase lasts 14 days in most women, without great variation. In the absence of beta- human
chorionic gonadotrophin (βhCG) being produced from an implanting embryo, the CL will regress in a
process known as luteolysis. The mature CL is less sensitive to LH, produces less progesterone and will
gradually disappear from the ovary. The withdrawal of progesterone has the effect on the uterus of
causing shedding of the endometrium and thus menstruation. Reduction in levels of progesterone,
oestrogen and inhibin feeding back to the pituitary cause increased secretion of gonadotrophic hormones,
particularly FSH. New preantral follicles begin to be stimulated and the cycle begins anew.

The endometrium
The hormone changes effected by the HPO axis during the menstrual cycle will occur whether the uterus is
present or not. However, the specific secondary changes in the uterine endometrium give the most obvious
external sign of regular cycles (Figure 3.2).

The proliferative phase
The endometrium enters the proliferative phase after menstruation, when glandular and stromal growth
begin. The epithelium lining the endometrial glands changes from a single layer of columnar cells to a
pseudostratified epithelium with frequent mitoses. Endometrial thickness increases rapidly, from 0.5 mm
at menstruation to 3.5–5 mm at the end of the proliferative phase.

The secretory phase
After ovulation (generally around day 14), there is a period of endometrial glandular secretory activity.
Following the LH surge, the oestrogen-induced cellular proliferation is inhibited and the endometrial
thickness does not increase any further. However, the endometrial glands will become more tortuous,
spiral arteries will grow and fluid is secreted into glandular cells and into the uterine lumen. Later in the
secretory phase, progesterone induces the formation of a temporary layer, known as the decidua, in the
endometrial stroma. Histologically, this is seen as occurring around blood vessels. Stromal cells show
increased mitotic activity, nuclear enlargement and generation of a basement membrane (Figure 3.3).
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Apical membrane projections of the endometrial epithelial cells, known as pinopodes, appear after
day 21–22 and appear to be a progesterone-dependent stage in making the endometrium receptive for
embryo implantation (Figure 3.4).

Figure 3.2 Changes in hormone levels, endometrium and follicle development during the menstrual cycle.

Figure 3.3 Tissue sections of normal endometrium during proliferative (A) and secretory (B) phases of
the menstrual cycle.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 3.4 Photomicrograph of endometrial pinopods from the implantation window.

Menstruation
Menstruation (day 1) is the shedding of the ‘dead’ endometrium and ceases as the endometrium
regenerates (which normally happens by day 5–6 of the cycle). Immediately prior to menstruation, three
distinct layers of endometrium can be seen. The basalis is the lower 25% of the endometrium, which will
remain throughout menstruation and shows few changes during the menstrual cycle. The midportion is the
stratum spongiosum with oedematous stroma and exhausted glands. The superficial portion (upper 25%)
is the stratum compactum with prominent decidualized stromal cells. A fall in circulating levels of
oestrogen and progesterone approximately 14 days after ovulation leads to loss of tissue fluid,
vasoconstriction of spiral arterioles and distal ischaemia. This results in tissue breakdown and loss of the
upper layers, along with bleeding from fragments of the remaining arterioles, seen as menstrual bleeding.
Enhanced fibrinolysis reduces clotting.
The effects of oestrogen and progesterone on the endometrium can be reproduced artificially, for
example in patients taking the combined oral contraceptive pill or hormone replacement therapy (HRT),
who experience a withdrawal bleed during their pill-free week each month.
Vaginal bleeding will cease after 5–10 days as arterioles vasoconstrict and the endometrium begins to
regenerate. Haemostasis in the uterine endometrium is different from haemostasis elsewhere in the body
as it does not involve the processes of clot formation and fibrosis.
The endocrine influences in menstruation are clear. However, the paracrine mediators are less so. PG
F2α, endothelin-1 and platelet activating factor (PAF) are vasoconstrictors that are produced within the
endometrium and are thought likely to be involved in vessel constriction, both initiating and controlling
menstruation. They may be balanced by the effect of vasodilator agents, such as PG E2, prostacyclin
(PGI) and nitric oxide, which are also produced by the endometrium. Recent research has shown that
progesterone withdrawal increases endometrial PG synthesis and decreases PG metabolism. The
cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 enzyme and chemokines are involved in PG synthesis and this is likely to be the
target of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) used for the treatment of heavy and painful
periods.
Endometrial repair involves both glandular and stromal regeneration and angiogenesis to reconstitute
the endometrial vasculature. VEGF and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) are found within the endometrium
and both are powerful angiogenic agents. Epidermal growth factor (EGF) appears to be responsible for
mediation of oestrogen-induced glandular and stromal regeneration. Other growth factors, such as
transforming growth factors (TGFs) and IGFs, and the interleukins may also be important.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Puberty and secondary sexual development
Normal puberty
Puberty is the process of reproductive and sexual development and maturation that changes a child into an
adult. During childhood, the HPO axis is suppressed and levels of GnRH, FSH and LH are very low.
From the age of 8–9 years GnRH is secreted in pulsations of increasing amplitude and frequency. These
are initially sleep-related, but as puberty progresses, these extend throughout the day. This stimulates
secretion of FSH and LH by the pituitary glands, which in turn triggers follicular growth and
steroidogenesis in the ovary. The oestrogen produced by the ovary then initiates the physical changes of
puberty. The exact mechanism determining the onset of puberty is still unknown, but it is influenced by
many factors including race, heredity, body weight and exercise. Leptin plays a permissive role in the
onset of puberty.
The physical changes occurring in puberty are breast development (thelarche), pubic and axillary hair
growth (adrenarche), growth spurt and onset of menstruation (menarche).
The first physical signs of puberty are breast budding and this occurs 2–3 years before menarche. The
appearance of pubic hair is dependent on the secretion of adrenal androgens and is usually after thelarche.
In addition to increasing levels of adrenal and gonadal hormones, growth hormone secretion also
increases, leading to a pubertal growth spurt. The mean age of menarche is 12.8 years and it may take
over 3 years before the menstrual cycle establishes a regular pattern. Initial cycles are usually
anovulatory and can be unpredictable and irregular. The absence of menstruation is called amenorrhoea
and may be primary or secondary (see Box 3.2, page 41). Pubertal development was described by Tanner
and the stages of breast and pubic hair development are often referred to as Tanner stages 1–5 (Figure
3.5).

Precocious puberty
This is defined as the onset of puberty before the age of 8 in a girl or 9 in a boy. It is classified as either
central or peripheral. Central precocious puberty is gonadotrophin dependent. The aetiology is often
unknown, although up to 25% are due to central nervous system (CNS) malformations or brain tumours.
Peripheral precocious puberty, which is gonadotrophin independent, is always pathological and can be
caused by oestrogen secretion, such as exogenous ingestion or a hormone-producing tumour.

Delayed puberty
When there are no signs of secondary sexual characteristics by the age of 14 years this is termed delayed
puberty. It is due to either a central defect (hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism) or a failure of gonadal
function (hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism), which are described below.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 3.5 Tanner staging.

Box 3.1 Hypo- and hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism
Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism
• This is central and may be constitutional, but other causes must be excluded: these include anorexia
nervosa, excessive exercise and chronic illness, such as diabetes or renal failure. Rarer causes
include a pituitary tumour and Kalmans syndrome.
• Associated with delayed puberty and primary amenorrhoea.
Hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism
• This is caused by gonadal failure.
• The gonad does not function despite high gonadotrophins.
• Associated with Turner syndrome and XX gonadal dysgenesis.
• Premature ovarian failure can occur at any age, including prior to pubertal age, and may be
idiopathic, but can also be part of an autoimmune or metabolic disorder or following chemo- or
radiotherapy for childhood cancer.
• Associated with delayed puberty and primary amenorrhoea.
• Hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism can also occur later in life and will cause secondary
amenorrhoea after normal sexual development.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Disorders of sexual development
DSD are conditions where the sequence of events described above does not happen. The clinical
consequences of this depend upon where within the sequence the variation occurs. DSD may be
diagnosed at birth with ambiguous or abnormal genitalia, but may also be seen at puberty in girls who
present with primary amenorrhoea or increasing virilization.

Table 3.1 Summary of terminology for disorders of sex development (DSD)

There has been change in the terminology used to refer to these conditions over the last 10 years.
Older terms, such as ‘hermaphrodite’ and ‘intersex’, are confusing to both the clinician and patients, and
in addition can be hurtful. The accepted terminology is summarized in Table 3.1.

Non-structural causes of DSD
Turner syndrome
The total complement of chromosomes is 45 in Turner syndrome, which results from a complete or partial
absence of one X chromosome (45XO). Turner syndrome is the most common chromosomal anomaly in
females, occurring in 1 in 2,500 live female births. A mosaic karyotype is not uncommon, leading to a
variable presentation. Although there can be variation, the most typical clinical features include short
stature, webbing of the neck and a wide carrying angle. Associated medical conditions include
coarctation of the aorta, inflammatory bowel disease, sensorineural and conduction deafness, renal
anomalies and endocrine dysfunction, such as autoimmune thyroid disease.
In this condition, the ovary does not complete its normal development and only the stroma is present at
birth. The gonads are called ‘streak gonads’ and do not function to produce oestrogen or oocytes.
Diagnosis is usually made at birth or in early childhood from the clinical appearance of the baby or due to
short stature during childhood. However, in about 10% of women, the diagnosis is not made until
adolescence with delayed puberty. The ovaries do not produce oestrogen, so the normal physical changes
of puberty cannot happen. In childhood, treatment is focused on growth, but in adolescence it focuses on
induction of puberty. Pregnancy is only possible with ovum donation. Psychological input and support is
www.medicalebookpdf.com

important. In girls with mosaicism the clinical picture can vary and normal puberty and menstruation can
occur, with early cessation of periods.

46XY gonadal dysgenesis
In this situation, the gonads do not develop into a testis, despite the presence of an XY karyotype. In about
15% of cases, this is due to a mutation in the SRY gene on the Y chromosome, but in most cases the cause
is unknown. In complete gonadal dysgenesis (Swyer syndrome), the gonad remains as a streak gonad and
does not produce any hormones. In the absence of anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH), the Müllerian
structures do not regress and the uterus, vagina and Fallopian tubes develop normally. The absence of
testosterone means the fetus does not virilize. The baby is phenotypically female, although has an XY
chromosome. The gonads do not function and presentation is usually at adolescence with delayed puberty.
The dysgenetic gonad has a high malignancy risk and should be removed when the diagnosis is made. This
is usually performed laparoscopically. Puberty must be induced with oestrogen and pregnancies have
been reported with a donor oocyte. Full disclosure of the diagnosis including the XY karytoype is
essential, although this can be devastating and specialized psychological input is crucial.
Mixed gonadal dysgenesis is a more complex condition. The karyotype may be 46XX, but XX/XY
mosaicism is present in up to 20%. In this situation, both functioning ovarian and testicular tissue can be
present and if so, this condition is known as ovotesticular DSD. The anatomical findings vary depending
on the function of the gonads. For example, if the testis is functional, then the baby will virilize and have
ambiguous or normal male genitalia. The Müllerian structures are usually absent on the side of the
functioning testis, but a unicornuate uterus may be present if there is an ovary or streak gonad.

46XY DSD
The most common cause of 46XY DSD, complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS), occurs in
individuals where virilization of the external genitalia does not occur, due to a partial or complete
inability of the androgen receptor to respond to androgen stimulation. In the fetus with CAIS, testes form
normally due to the action of the SRY gene. At the appropriate time, these testes secrete AMH, leading to
the regression of the Müllerian ducts. Hence, CAIS women do not have a uterus. Testosterone is also
produced at the appropriate time; however, due to the inability of the androgen receptor to respond, the
external genitalia do not virilize and instead undergo female development. The baby is born with normal
female external genitalia, an absent uterus and testes that are found somewhere in their line of descent
through the abdomen from the pelvis to the inguinal canal. Presentation is usually at puberty with primary
amenorrhoea, although if the testes are in the inguinal canal they can cause a hernia in a younger girl. Once
the diagnosis is made, initial management is psychological with full disclosure of the XY karyotype and
the information that the patient will be infertile.
Gonadectomy is recommended because of the small long-term risk of testicular malignancy, although
this can be deferred until after puberty. Once the gonads are removed, long-term HRT will be required.
The vagina is usually shortened and treatment will be required to create a vagina suitable for penetrative
intercourse. Vaginal dilation is the most effective method of improving vaginal length and entails the
insertion of vaginal moulds of gradually increasing length and width for at least 30 minutes a day.
Surgical vaginal reconstruction operations are reserved for those women that have not responded to a
dilation treatment programme.
In cases of partial androgen insensitivity, the androgen receptor can respond to some extent with
limited virilization. The child is usually diagnosed at birth with ambiguous genitalia.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

5-Alpha-reductase deficiency
In this condition, the fetus has an XY karytype and normal functioning testes that produce both testosterone
and AMH. However, the fetus is unable to convert testosterone to dihydrotestosterone in the peripheral
tissues and so cannot virilize normally. Presentation is usually with ambiguous genitalia at birth, but can
also be with increasing virilization at puberty of a female child, due to the large increase in circulating
testosterone with the onset of puberty. In the Western world, the child is usually assigned to a female sex
of rearing, but there have been descriptions of a few communities where transition from a female to male
gender at puberty is accepted.

46XX DSD
The most common cause of 46XX DSD, congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), leads to virilization of a
female fetus. It is due to an enzyme deficiency in the corticosteroid production pathway in the adrenal
gland, with over 90% being a deficiency in 21-hydroxylase, which converts progesterone to
deoxycorticosterone and 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17-OHP) to deoxycortisol. The reduced levels of
cortisol being produced drive the negative-feedback loop, resulting in hyperplasia of the adrenal glands.
This leads to an excess of androgen precursors and then to elevated testosterone production. Raised
androgen levels in a female fetus will lead to virilization of the external genitalia. The clitoris is enlarged
and the labia are fused and scrotal in appearance. The upper vagina joins the urethra and opens as one
common channel onto the perineum. In addition, two-thirds of children with 21-hydroxylase CAH will
have a ‘salt-losing’ variety, which also affects the ability to produce aldosterone. This represents a lifethreatening situation, and those children who are salt-losing often become dangerously unwell within a
few days of birth. Affected individuals require life-long steroid replacement, such as hydrocortisone,
along with fludrocortisone for salt losers. Once the infant is well and stabilized on their steroid regime,
surgical treatment of the genitalia is considered. Traditionally, all female infants with CAH underwent
feminizing genital surgery within the first year of life. This management is now controversial as adult
patients with CAH are very dissatisfied with the outcome of their surgery and argue that surgery should
have been deferred until they were old enough to have a choice. Surgery certainly leaves scarring and
may reduce sexual sensitivity, but the alternative of leaving the genitalia virilized throughout childhood
can be difficult for parents to consider. At present, cases are managed individually by a multidisciplinary
team (MDT) involving surgeons, endocrinologists and psychologists.

Disorders of menstrual regularity
Amenorrhoea and oligomenorrhoea
Amenorrhoea is defined as the absence of menstruation for more than 6 months in the absence of
pregnancy in a woman of fertile age, and oligomenorrhoea is defined as irregular periods at intervals of
more than 35 days, with only 4–9 periods a year. The causes may be hypothalamic, pituitary, ovarian or
endometrial, and both amenorrhoea and oligomenorrhoea may be primary or secondary.

Box 3.2 Amenorrhoea
• Primary amenorrhoea is when girls fail to menstruate by 16 years of age.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• Secondary amenorrhoea is absence of menstruation for more than 6 months in a normal female of
reproductive age that is not due to pregnancy, lactation or the menopause.

Hypothalamic disorders
Hypothalamic disorders will give rise to hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism, with the following causes:
• Excessive exercise, weight loss and stress.
• Hypothalamic lesions (craniopharyngioma, glioma), which can compress hypothalamic tissue or block
dopamine.
• Head injuries.
• Kallman’s syndrome (X-linked recessive condition resulting in deficiency in GnRH causing
underdeveloped genitalia).
• Systemic disorders including sarcoidosis, tuberculosis resulting in an infiltrative process in the
hypothalamo-hypophyseal region.
• Drugs: progestogens, HRT or dopamine antagonists.

Pituitary disorders
Pituitary disorders will also give rise to hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism, with the following causes:
• Adenomas, of which prolactinoma is most common.
• Pituitary necrosis (e.g. Sheehan’s syndrome, due to prolonged hypotension following major obstetric
haemorrhage).
• Iatrogenic damage (surgery or radiotherapy).
• Congenital failure of pituitary development.

Ovarian disorders
Anovulation is often due to polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), described below. Ovarian failure is the
cause of hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism. Premature ovarian failure (POF) is defined as cessation of
periods before 40 years of age and is described in Chapter 8, The menopause and postreproductive
health.

Endometrial disorders
Primary amenorrhoea may result from Müllerian defects in the genital tract including an absent uterus, or
outflow tract abnormalities, leading to a haematocolpos. Secondary amenorrhoea may result from scarring
of the endometrium called Asherman syndrome and is described further in Chapter 4, Disorders of
menstrual bleeding.
Findings from the history should guide the examination (Table 3.2). A general inspection of the patient
should be carried out to assess body mass index (BMI), secondary sexual characteristics (hair growth,
breast development using Tanner scores) and signs of endocrine abnormalities (hirsutism, acne,
abdominal striae, moon face, skin changes). If the history is suggestive of a pituitary lesion, an assessment
www.medicalebookpdf.com

of visual fields is indicated. External genitalia and a vaginal examination should be performed to detect
structural outflow abnormalities or demonstrate atrophic changes consistent with hypo-oestrogenism.

Investigation of amenorrhoea/oligomenorrhoea
Findings from the history and examination should guide the choice and order of investigations. A
pregnancy test should be carried out if the patient is sexually active. Blood can be taken for LH, FSH and
testosterone; raised LH or raised testosterone could be suggestive of PCOS; raised FSH may be
suggestive of POF. A raised prolactin level may indicate a prolactinoma. Thyroid function should be
checked if clinically indicated. An ultrasound scan can be useful in detecting the classical appearances of
polycystic ovaries (Figure 3.6) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain should be carried out
if symptoms are consistent with a pituitary adenoma. Hysteroscopy is not routine, but is a suitable
investigation where Asherman or cervical stenosis is suspected. Karyotyping is diagnostic of Turner’s
and other sex chromosome abnormalities.

Table 3.2 History and examination of patient with amenorrhoea/oligomenorrhoea

Table 3.3 Management of amenorrhoea/oligomenorrhoea
www.medicalebookpdf.com

The management of amenorrhoea/oligomenorrhoea is outlined in Table 3.3. More specific descriptions
of management are detailed in the chapters indicated.

Polycystic ovary syndrome
PCOS is a syndrome of ovarian dysfunction along with the cardinal features of hyperandrogenism and
polycystic ovary morphology (Figure 3.6). The prevalence of polycystic ovaries seen on ultrasound is
around 25% of all women but is not always associated with the full syndrome. Clinical manifestations
include menstrual irregularities, signs of androgen excess (e.g. hirsutism and acne) and obesity. Elevated
serum LH levels, biochemical evidence of hyperandrogenism and raised insulin resistance are also
common features.
PCOS is associated with an increased risk of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular events. It affects
around 5–10% of women of reproductive age. The aetiology of PCOS is not completely clear, although
the frequent familial trend points to a genetic cause.

Clinical features
• Oligomenorrhoea/amenorrhoea in up to 75% of patients, predominantly related to chronic anovulation.
• Hirsutism.
• Subfertility in up to 75% of women.
eResource 3.1
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv3.1.php

Figure 3.6 Gross appearance of a polycystic ovary (A) and transvaginal ultrasound scan image (B).
• Obesity in at least 40% of patients.
• Acanthosis nigricans (areas of increased velvety skin pigmentation occur in the axillae and other
flexures).
• May be asymptomatic.

Diagnosis
Patients must have two out of the three features below:
• Amenorrhoea/oligomenorrhoea.
• Clinical or biochemical hyperandrogenism.
• Polycystic ovaries on ultrasound. The ultrasound criteria for the diagnosis of a polycystic ovary are
eight or more subcapsular follicular cysts <10 mm in diameter and increased ovarian stroma. While
these findings support a diagnosis of PCOS, they are not by themselves sufficient to identify the
syndrome.

Management
Management of PCOS involves the following:
• Combined oral contraceptive pill (COCP) to regulate menstruation. This also increases sex hormonebinding globulin, which will help reduce androgenic symptoms.
• Cyclical oral progesterone: used to regulate a withdrawal bleed.
• Clomiphene: this can be used to induce ovulation where subfertility is a factor.
• Lifestyle advice: dietary modification and exercise is appropriate in these patients as they are at an
increased risk of developing diabetes and cardiovascular disease later in life. Aerobic exercise has
been shown to improve insulin resistance.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• Weight reduction.
• Ovarian drilling, a laparoscopic procedure to destroy some of the ovarian stroma that may prompt
ovulatory cycles.
• Treatment of hirsutism/androgenic symptoms:
• eflornithine cream (Vaniqua™) applied topically;
• cyproterone acetate (an antiandrogen contained in the Dianette™ contraceptive pill, sometimes used
alone);
• metformin: this is beneficial in a subset of patients with PCOS, those with hyperinsulinaemia and
cardiovascular risk factors. It improves parameters of insulin resistance, hyperandrogenaemia,
anovulation and acne in PCOS, and may aid weight loss. It is less effective than clomiphene for
ovulation induction and does not improve pregnancy outcome;
• GnRH analogues with low-dose HRT: this regime should be reserved for women intolerant of other
therapies;
• surgical treatments (e.g. laser or electrolysis).

Premenstrual syndrome
Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) is the occurrence of cyclical somatic, psychological and emotional
symptoms that occur in the luteal (premenstrual) phase of the menstrual cycle and resolve by the time
menstruation ceases. Premenstrual symptoms occur in almost all women of reproductive age. In 3–60%
symptoms are severe, causing disruption to everyday life, in particular interpersonal relationships.

Aetiology
The precise aetiology of PMS is unknown, but cyclical ovarian activity and the effects of oestradiol and
progesterone on certain neurotransmitters, including serotonin, appear to play a role.

History and examination
The patient is likely to complain of some or all of the following: bloating cyclical weight gain, mastalgia,
abdominal cramps, fatigue, headache, depression, irritability. The cyclical nature of PMS is the
cornerstone of the diagnosis. A symptom chart, to be filled in by the patient prospectively, may help.

Management
The management of PMS is depicted in Figure 3.7.
eResource 3.2
PMS patient guidance
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv3.2.php

www.medicalebookpdf.com

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 3.7 Algorithm for the treatment of premenstrual syndrome (PMS). (GP, general practitioner;
GnRH, gonadotrophin-releasing hormone; HRT, hormone replacement therapy; NAPS, National
Association for Premenstrual Syndrome.) (Adapted with permission from Guidelines for the National
Association for Premenstrual Syndrome, www.pms.org.uk.)
• Simple therapies: include stress reduction, alcohol and caffeine limitation and exercise.
• Medical treatments:
• COCP: the most effective regime appears to be bicycling or tricycling pill packets (i.e. taking two or
three packets in a row without a scheduled break);
• transdermal oestrogen: this has been shown to significantly reduce PMS symptoms, by overcoming the
fluctuations of the normal cycle;
• GnRH analogues are a very effective treatment for PMS as they turn off ovarian activity. To reduce the
risk of osteoporosis it is recommended that a continuous combined form of hormone replacement
therapy is administered concurrently;
• selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs): there is good evidence that this group of drugs
significantly improves PMS.
• Hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oopherectomy: this procedure obviously completely removes the
ovarian cycle. It should only be performed if all other treatments have failed. It is essential for such
patients to have a preoperative trial of GnRH analogue as a ‘test’ to ensure that switching off ovarian
function (by removing the ovaries at hysterectomy) will indeed cure the problem.
• Vitamins: initial studies suggest that magnesium, calcium and isoflavones and vitamin B6 may be useful
in treating PMS.
• Alternative therapies:
• initial results of St John’s Wort are promising, particularly in improving mood. Although Evening
Primrose oil is commonly used, there is no evidence to support this treatment for PMS;
• cognitive-behavioural therapy (CBT): CBT appears to be particularly effective when combined with
SSRIs.

KEY LEARNING POINTS
• The hypothalamus, pituitary, ovary and the end organ endometrium have a subtle interplay.
• Normal puberty and a regular menstrual cycle require function of each organ and healthy hormonal
interaction.
• DSD may be diagnosed at birth but some cause delayed puberty or primary amenorrhoea.
• Oligomenorrhoea and amenorrhoea may be primary or secondary and may be caused by
hypothalamic, pituitary, ovarian or other hormonal disorders. They can also be caused by
endometrial problems.
• PCOS is a common disorder associated with oligomenorrhoea.
• PMS is common and can be treated with simple remedies as well as medical remedies.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Further reading
Balen AH, Conway GS, Homburg R, Legro RS (2005). Polycystic Ovary Syndrome: A Guide to
Clinical Management. London, New York: Taylor & Francis.
Hughes IA, Houk C, Ahmed SF, Lee PA; LWPES Consensus Group; ESPE Consensus Group (2006).
Consensus statement on management of intersex disorders. Arch Dis Child 91(7):554–63.
National
Association
for
Premenstrual
Syndrome.
http://www.pms.org.uk/assets/files/guidelinesfinal60210.pdf.

Self assessment
CASE HISTORY
A 22-year-old woman approached her GP complaining of irregular periods and excess facial hair
and spots. She had increased her weight by 5 kg in the last year. Examination was not remarkable,
but her BMI was raised at 30.
A What additional features of the history would you seek?
B Outline the investigations and management.
ANSWERS
A In the history it would be important to know the number of periods in the last year, as
oligomenorrhoea is a risk factor for endometrial hypertrophy. Although she is only 22, it would be
important to know her plans for future children, as many women will have read about polycystic
ovaries on the internet and be concerned about the infertility risk. Ask whether she has a partner at
the moment and whether she is sexually active. Ask about contraindications to the pill, as even
without investigation the possibility of PCOS should have occurred to you because it is the most
common cause of anvolution and strongly associated with obesity. You find that she has no
contraindications to the pill, has a partner and is sexually active using condoms but does not want
children yet.
B You recommend a transvaginal ultrasound scan (TVUSS).
This reveals that the ovaries are enlarged with more than 10 prenatal follicles on each side
with a dense stroma. The combination of this and the clinical signs are sufficient to make a
diagnosis of PCOS, and you do not need to perform further blood tests at this point.
The first-line medical treatment would be the oral contraceptive pill. This will regulate her
bleeds. It will also help reduce facial hair growth by elevating sex hormone-binding globulin
(SHBG), hence reducing free testosterone. However, the most important treatment is to reduce her
weight and increase her aerobic exercise, as a reduction in weight will promote spontaneous
ovulation.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

SBA QUESTIONS
1 Menstruation is the shedding of the dead endometrium. Which of the following facts are correct?
Choose the single best answer.
A During menstruation the stratum basalis is shed.
B During menstruation the stratum compactum is shed.
C During menstruation fibrinolysis is enhanced.
D Endometrial regeneration begins after ovulation.
E Vasodilation of the spiral arterioles precedes menstruation.
ANSWER
B Prior to menstruation vasoconstriction of the spiral arterioles occurs causing ischaemia.
The stratum basalis remains while the compactum is shed. Fibrinolysis is enhanced to prevent
clotting; haemostasis is not the same as elsewhere is the body. Endometrial regeneration begins as
the bleed ends.
2 With regards polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), which of the following statements is true?
Choose the single best answer.
A PCOS is an unusual cause of anovulation.
B Ultrasonic evidence of polycystic ovaries is present in 50% of all women.
C PCOS is associated with obesity in 10% of women.
D PCOS is associated with acanthosis nigricans.
E The diagnosis of PCOS can only be made with biochemical evidence of hyperandrogenism.
ANSWER
D PCOS is the most common cause of anovolution. Based on ultrasound alone, PCOS-type ovaries
are seen in 25% of women, some of whom are not symptomatic. More than 40% of women with
PCOS are overweight, and PCOS is associated with acanthosis nigricans mediated by high insulin.
Women must have two of three diagnostic criteria: ultrasonic evidence of PCOS, clinical or
biochemical hyperandrogenism, chronic anovulation.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

www.medicalebookpdf.com

CHAPTER 4

Disorders of menstrual bleeding
HELEN BICKERSTAFF

Introduction
Heavy menstrual bleeding
Dysmenorrhoea
Further reading
Self assessment

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
• Understand the symptoms and aetiology of abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB).
• Describe the terminology of AUB.
• Understand the symptoms, investigation and management of heavy menstrual bleeding (HMB).
• Appreciate the impact of HMB on ability to function.
• Understand the causes and investigation of dysmenorrhoea.
• Understand the action of medication used for menorrhagia and dysmenorrhoea.

Introduction
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Disorders of menstrual bleeding, now termed AUB, are one of the most common reasons for women to
attend their general practitioner (GP) and, subsequently, a gynaecologist. Although rarely life threatening,
menstrual disorders can cause major social, psychological and occupational upset. There are several
types of abnormal bleeding and their terminology should be known. Heavy menstrual bleeding (HMB),
intermenstrual bleeding (IMB), postcoital bleeding (PCB) and postmenopausal bleeding (PMB) should be
investigated and treated further as described in the chapters indicated. Initial investigations for each
include speculum examination of the cervix, with swabs for microbiology and cervical smear if indicated,
and transvaginal ultrasound scan (TVUSS) and endometrial biopsy (EB) as necessary. Further to this,
outpatient hysteroscopy and biopsy may be indicated.
There are several classification systems for AUB, some of which link symptoms to pathology. Such
systems help clinicians to adopt a similar categorization of the pathology they are seeing, which helps
audit and research. One system that is increasingly recognized is the PALM–COEIN system developed by
the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO), in which the nemonic PALM
represents visually objective structural criteria: Polyps, Adenomyosis, Leiomyoma, Malignancy, and
COEIN for causes unrelated to structural anomalies: Coagulopathy, Ovulatory disorders, Endometrial,
Iatrogenic, and Not classified causes (see Further reading). Note that further descriptions in this chapter
for causes of AUB do not refer specifically to this system.

Accepted terminology for common types of AUB
• HMB: excessive menstrual blood loss (this chapter).
• IMB: bleeding between periods, often seen with endometrial and cervical polyps (Chapter 12,
Benign conditions of the uterus, cervix and endometrium), also endometriosis (Chapter 11, Benign
conditions of the ovary and pelvis).
• PCB: bleeding after sex. Often associated with cervical abnormalities (Chapter 16, Premalignant
and malignant disease of the lower genital tract).
• PMB: bleeding more than 1 year after cessation of periods. Exclude endometrial pathology or
vaginal atrophy (Chapter 8, The menopause and postreproductive health and Chapter 15, Malignant
disease of the uterus).
• BEO: ‘bleeding of endometrial origin’, a diagnosis of exclusion, has replaced the term
‘dysfunctional uterine bleeding’ (DUB).

Heavy menstrual bleeding
HMB is the most common type of menstrual bleeding disorder. There has previously been some confusion
over the various terminologies used for abnormalities of excessive menstrual blood loss. HMB is now the
preferred description as it is simple and easily translatable into other languages. It replaces the older term
‘menorrhagia’.
HMB is defined as a blood loss of greater than 80 ml per period. In reality, methods to quantify
menstrual blood loss are both inaccurate (poor correlation with haemoglobin level) and impractical, and
so a clinical diagnosis based on the patient’s own perception of blood loss is preferred.
Of women of reproductive age, 20–30% suffer from HMB. Each year in the UK, 5% of women
between the ages of 30 and 49 consult their
GP with HMB, with a substantial number being referred on to
www.medicalebookpdf.com

secondary care.
The aetiology of HBM may be hormonal or structural, with common causes listed below:
• Fibroids: 30% of HMB is associated with fibroids.
• Adenomyosis: 70% of women will have AUB/HMB.
• Endometrial polyps (Figure 4.1).

Figure 4.1 Endometrial polyps.
• Coagulation disorders (e.g. von Willebrand disease).
• Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID).
• Thyroid disease.
• Drug therapy (e.g. warfarin).
• Intrauterine devices (IUDs).
• Endometrial/cervical carcinoma.
Other symptoms may be described in the history of women with HMB that may be suggestive of
pathology, as shown in Table 4.1.
Despite appropriate investigations, often no pathology can be identified. BEO is the diagnosis of
exclusion. This replaces the older DUB. Disordered endometrial prostaglandin production has been
implicated in the aetiology of BEO, as has abnormalities of endometrial vascular development.

History and examination
The relevant questions to determine heaviness of the period and the extent to which is disrupts the
woman’s life and causes anaemia have been covered in Chapter 2, Gynaecological history, examination
and investigations. In younger women it is important to question whether HMB started at menarche, as this
is much less likely to be associated with pathology. The regularity of the menstrual cycle is also important
as heavy anovulatory bleeds may be associated with early puberty, polycystic ovary syndrome or the
perimenopause.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

eResource 4.1
HMB history and examination
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv4.1.php

Table 4.1 Symptoms that may be associated with HMB and related pathologies

After examining the patient for signs of anaemia, it is important to perform an abdominal and pelvic
examination in all women complaining of HMB. This enables any pelvic masses to be palpated, the
cervix to be visualized for polyps/carcinoma, swabs to be taken if pelvic infection is suspected or a
cervical smear to be taken if one is due.

Investigations
The NICE guidelines for HMB indicate the following investigations and are useful guide for clinicians:
• Full blood count (FBC) should be performed in all women (but serum ferritin should not be performed).
• Coagulation screen only if coagulation HMB since menarche or family history of coagulation defects.
• Hormone testing should not be performed.
• Pelvic ultrasound scan if history suggests structural or histological abnormality such as PCB, IMB,
pain/pressure symptoms, or enlarged uterus or vaginal mass is palpable on pelvic examination.
• High vaginal and endocervical swabs.
• EB should be considered if risk factors such as age over 45, treatment failure or risk factors for
endometrial pathology. Sensitivity of EB increases when performed in addition to using the cut-off of 4
mm endometrial thickness on TVUSS.
• Thyroid function tests should only be carried out when the history is suggestive of a thyroid disorder.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

An outpatient hysteroscopy (Figure 4.2) with guided biopsy may be indicated if:
• EB biopsy attempt fails.
• EB biopsy sample is insufficient for histopathology assessment.
• TVUSS is inconclusive, for example to establish the exact location of a submucosal or intramural
fibroid.
• There is an abnormality on TVUSS amenable to treatment (e.g. suggested endometrial polyp or
submucosal fibroid), if there are facilities to perform resections.
If the patient fails to tolerate an outpatient procedure, if the cervix needs to be dilated to enter the
cavity, or for treatment of large polyps or submucosal fibroids, then a hysteroscopy proceeding to
treatment under general anaesthetic may be required.

Figure 4.2 An outpatient hysteroscopy set.

Role of EB in HMB
An EB or outpatient hysteroscopy is indicated if there is:
• PMB and endometrial thickness on TVUSS >4 mm.
• HMB over 45 years.
• HMB associated with IMB.
• Treatment failure.
• Prior to ablative techniques.

Management
For some women, the demonstration that their blood loss is in fact ‘normal’ may be sufficient to reassure
them and make further treatment unnecessary. For others, there are a number of different treatments for
HMB. The effectiveness of medical treatments is often temporary, while surgical treatments are mostly
incompatible with desired fertility.
When selecting appropriate management for the patient, it is important to consider and discuss:
• The patient’s preference of treatment.
• Risks/benefits of each option.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• Contraceptive requirements:
• family complete?
• current contraception?
• Past medical history:
• any contraindications to medical therapies for HMB?
• suitability for an anaesthetic.
• Previous surgical history on uterus.

Management of HMB
• LNG-IUS.
• Transexmic acid/mefenamic acid or combined oral contraceptive pill (COCP).
• Progestogens.
• Endometrial ablation.
• Hysterectomy or umbilical artery embolization (UAE) for fibroids.

Medical
Initial management of HMB in the absence of structural or histological abnormality should be medical.
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines (see Further reading) suggest the
following order:
• Levonorgestrel intrauterine system (LNG-IUS, Mirena™), provided long-term use of at least 12 months
is expected. LNG-IUS, Mirena™ (as further described in Chapter 6, Contraception and abortion) has
revolutionized the treatment of HMB. Mean reductions in mean blood loss (MBL) of around 95% are
achieved by 1 year after LNG-IUS insertion. It provides a highly effective alternative to surgical
treatment, with few side-effects. Indeed, the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
(RCOG) has suggested that the LNG-IUS should be considered in the majority of women as an
alternative to surgical treatment. It is obviously not suitable for women wishing to conceive.
• Tranexamic acid, an antifibrinolytic that reduces blood loss by 50% and is taken during menstruation, or
mefenamic acid, which inhibits prostaglandin synthesis and reduces blood loss by 30%, or COCP,
which will induce slightly lighter periods.
• Norethisterone, taken 15 mg daily in a cyclical pattern from day 6 to day 26 of the menstrual cycle.
• Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists: these drugs act on the pituitary to stop the
production of oestrogen, which results in amenorrhoea. These are only used in the short term due to the
resulting hypo-oestrogenic state that predisposes to osteoporosis. They may be used preoperatively to
shrink fibroids or cause endometrial suppression to enhance visualization at hysteroscopy. In severe
HMB they can allow the patient the opportunity to improve their haemoglobin by providing a respite
from bleeding.

Surgical
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Details of surgical interventions including preoperative assessment, consent and complications are
covered in Chapter 17, Gynaecological surgery and therapeutics.
Surgical treatment is normally restricted to women for whom medical treatments have failed or where
there are associated symptoms such as pressure symptoms from fibroids or prolapse. Women
contemplating surgical treatment for HMB must be certain that their family is complete. While this caveat
is obvious for women contemplating hysterectomy, in which the uterus will be removed, it also applies to
women contemplating endometrial ablation. Therefore, women wishing to preserve their fertility for
future attempts at childbearing should be advised to use medical methods of treatment. The risks of a
pregnancy after an ablation procedure theoretically include prematurity and morbidly adherent placenta.

Endometrial ablation
All endometrial destructive procedures employ the principle that ablation of the endometrial lining of the
uterus to sufficient depth prevents regeneration of the endometrium. Ablation is suitable for women with a
uterus no bigger than 10 weeks’ size and with fibroids less than 3 cm.
The first-generation techniques including transcervical resection of the endometrium with electrical
diathermy or rollerball ablation have largely been replaced by newer second-generation techniques
including:
• Impedance controlled endometrial ablation (Novosure™).
• Thermal uterine balloon therapy.
• Microwave ablation (Microsulis™) (Figure 4.3).
As a general rule, all women undergoing endometrial ablation should have access to a secondgeneration technique. After treatment, 40% will become amenorrhoeic, 40% will have markedly reduced
menstrual loss and 20% will have no difference in their bleeding. Some authorities have suggested that
endometrial ablation is so successful that all women with HMB should be encouraged to consider it
before opting for hysterectomy. While there are merits to this argument, some women, after informed
discussion, will still prefer hysterectomy and they should therefore be considered for this procedure
instead.

Figure 4.3 Microwave ablation (Microsulis™).
eResource 4.2
Endometrial ablation
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv4.2.php
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Umbilical artery embolization
UAE is treatment useful for HMB associated with fibroids, as discussed in Chapter 12, Benign conditions
of the uterus, cervix and endometrium.

Myomectomy
This may be a sensible option or women with HMB secondary to large fibroids with pressure symptoms
who wish to conceive (and are at an age where this is realistic).

Transcervical resection of fibroid
As described in Chapter 12, Benign conditions of the uterus, cervix and endometrium and Chapter 17,
Gynaecological surgery and therapeutics, transcervical resection of a large submucosal fibroid (TCRF)
may reduce HMB and is appropriate in women wishing to conceive.

Hysterectomy
A hysterectomy is the surgical removal of the uterus as described in Chapter 17, Gynaecological surgery
and therapeutics. It can be avoided in some women by medical and ablation procedures. However, it can
be necessary to control HMB in women who have not responded. It may be a first-line treatment in
women who have HMB associated with large fibroids who also have pressure symptoms, or who have a
smaller uterus and associated uterine prolapse.

Acute HMB
Not infrequently women are admitted to hospital with AUB. They require stabilization, examination to
exclude cervical abnormalities and pelvic masses, medication to arrest bleeding and correct anaemia,
investigation and discharge with a long-term plan to avoid further admissions.

Management of acute HMB
• Admit.
• Pelvic examination.
• FBC, coagulopathy screen, biochemistry.
• Intravenous access and resuscitation or transfusion as required.
• Tranexamic acid oral or IV.
• TVUSS.
• High-dose progestogens to arrest bleeding.
• Consider suppression with GnRH or ulipristol acetate in the medium term.
• Longer-term plan when a diagnosis has been made.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Dysmenorrhoea
Dysmenorrhoea is defined as painful menstruation. It is experienced by 45–95% of women of
reproductive age. Primary dysmenorrhoea describes painful periods since onset of menarche and is
unlikely to be associated with pathology. There is some evidence to support the assertion that primary
dysmenorrhoea improves after childbirth, and it also appears to decline with increasing age. Secondary
dysmenorrhoea describes painful periods that have developed over time and usually have a secondary
cause.

Aetiology of secondary dysmenorrhoea
Aetiology includes:
• Endometriosis and adenomyosis (Chapter 11, Benign conditions of the ovary and pelvis).
• Pelvic inflammatory disease (Chapter 9, Genitourinary problems).
• Cervical stenosis and haematometra (rarely).

History and examination
Patients will have different ideas as to what constitutes a painful period. For some patients reassurance
that the pain may be normal for her will help. For others the ability to alter the menstrual cycle to avoid
having a period during key events, for example school examinations or holidays, will be helpful.
To ascertain the actual severity of the pain, the following questions may be useful:
• Do you need to take painkillers for this pain? Which tablets help?
• Have you needed to take any time off work/school due to the pain?
Some primary dysmenorrhoea is associated with flushing and nausea, which may be prostaglandin
related. It is important to distinguish between menstrual pain that precedes the period (a vital clue in
endometriosis) and pain that only occurs with bleeding. Other important clues about the aetiology include
pain that occurs with passage of clots, in which case medication to reduce flow may be effective.
Secondary dysmenorrhoea may be associated with dyspareunia or AUB, which may point towards a
pathological diagnosis.
An abdominal and pelvic examination should be performed (excepting adolescents). Certain signs
associated with endometriosis include a pelvic mass (if an endometrioma is present), a fixed uterus (if
adhesions are present) and endometriotic nodules (palpable in the pouch of Douglas or on the uterosacral
ligaments). An enlarged uterus may be found with fibroids. Abnormal discharge and tenderness may be
seen with PID.
‘Red flags’ in the expression of dymenorrhoea lead the clinician to suspect serious pathology and
include an abnormal cervix on examination, persistent PCB or IMB, which may indicate endometrial or
cervical pathology, or a pelvic mass that is not obviously the uterus.

Investigations
• High vaginal and endocervical swabs.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• TVUSS scan may be useful to detect endometriomas or appearances suggestive of adenomyosis
(enlarged uterus with heterogeneous texture) or to image an enlarged uterus.
• Diagnostic laparoscopy: performed to investigate secondary dysmenorrhoea:
• when the history is suggestive of endometriosis;
• when swabs and ultrasound scan are normal, yet symptoms persist;
• when the patient wants a definite diagnosis or wants reassurance that their pelvis is normal.
Discussion about laparoscopy should include risks and the possibility that this investigation may show
no obvious causes for their symptoms.
If features in the history suggest cervical stenosis, ultrasound-guided hysteroscopy can be used to
investigate further. However, this condition is an infrequent cause of dysmenorrhoea, and this
investigation should not be routine. Laparoscopy for primary dysmenorrhoea should not usually be
performed.

Management
• Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs): effective in a large proportion of women. Some
examples are naproxen, ibuprofen and mefenamic acid.
• Hormonal contraceptives: COCP is widely used but, surprisingly, a recent review of randomized
controlled trials provides little evidence supporting this treatment as being effective for primary
dysmenorrhoea. Progestogens, either oral (desogestrol) or parenteral (medroxyprogesterone,
etonogestrel) may be useful to cause anovulation and amenorrhoea.
• LNG-IUS: there is evidence that this is beneficial for dysmenorrhoea and indeed can be an effective
treatment for underlying causes, such as endometriosis and adenomyosis. It is often used as a first-line
treatment before laparoscopy.
• Lifestyle changes: there is some evidence to suggest that a low fat, vegetarian diet may improve
dysmenorrhoea. There are suggestions that exercise may improve symptoms by improving blood flow to
the pelvis.
• Heat: although this may seem a rather old-fashioned method for helping dysmenorrhoea, there is strong
evidence to prove its benefit. It appears to be as effective as NSAIDs.
• GnRH analogues: this is not a first-line treatment nor an option for prolonged management due to the
resulting hypo-oestrogenic state. These are best used to manage symptoms if awaiting hysterectomy or
as a form of assessment as to the benefits of hysterectomy. If the pain does not settle with the GnRH
analogue, it is unlikely to be resolved by hysterectomy.
• Surgery: signs or symptoms of pathology such as endometriosis may warrant surgical laparoscopy to
perform adhesiolysis or treatment of endometriosis/drainage of endometriomas.

KEY LEARNING POINTS
• HMB is one of the most frequent causes for consultation in primary care and referral to secondary
care.
• HMG may be associated with symptoms that may indicate pathology, such as fibroids.
• Medical treatment of HMB with LNG-IUS, NSAIDs or other hormonal treatments is first line.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• Women should have access to second-generation ablation techniques, which should be offered
before hysterectomy for HMB.
• Women with associated pathology such as fibroids or prolapse may opt for hysterectomy.
• Primary dysmenorrhoea is rarely pathological.
• Secondary dysmenorrhoea may be associated with pathology such as endometriosis or PID.
• First-line treatment of dysmenorrhoea is medical with NSAIDs, COCP or progestogens.
• Women with secondary dysmenorrhoea and signs or symptoms of other pathology may need
laparoscopy.

Further reading
Munro MG, Critchley HOD, Broder MS, Fraser IS, for the FIGO Working Group on Menstrual
Disorders (2011). FIGO classification system (PALM-COEIN) for causes of abnormal uterine
bleeding in nongravid women of reproductive age. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 113(1):3–13.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and
management. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg44ICE guideline.

Self assessment
CLINICAL HISTORY
A 28-year-old woman has presented to her GP with HMB of 2 years’ duration. She also complained
of some dysmenorrhoea that was getting worse. On examination there is tenderness over the
uterosacral ligaments.
A What additional features of the history are important?
B What are the initial investigations?
C What is your management plan?
ANSWERS
A When taking the history it is important to determine how much the woman’s periods are interfering
with her daily life. The relationship of the pain to the periods is particularly important. Her plans
for children will influence your choice of treatment, as will any previous treatments and drug
allergies or contraindications.
She tells you that she is needing analgesia and frequent sanitary changes. She is working as a
nurse, and is finding some shifts difficult and has taken some sick days. The pain is worse before
www.medicalebookpdf.com

the period rather than with the menstrual bleed. Additionally, she has been wanting to conceive for
the last year.
B Appropriate investigations include FBC, TVUSS, high vaginal swab (HVS) and endocervical
swab.
C Treatment options are limited by the desire to conceive. It is appropriate to offer laparoscopy to
diagnose/treat endometriosis. It may be appropriate to perform tubal insufflation at the same time
as there has been a slight delay in conception.

SBA QUESTIONS
1 A 47-year-old woman presents to her GP with symptoms of HMB with flooding and clots. She is
otherwise well. Examination reveals a non-tender uterus that is not enlarged. A FBC has shown
signs of reduced haemoglobin.
What investigation is indicated next according to recent NICE guidelines? Choose the single best
answer.
A Thyroid function tests.
B Hormonal profile.
C Serum ferritin.
D Outpatient hysteroscopy.
E EB.
ANSWER
E Thyroid function is not indicated unless there are symptoms compatible with abnormal thyroid
function. Likewise, a hormonal profile is not likely to yield useful results in the absence of
symptoms. Serum ferritin will not add useful information to the FBC showing anaemia, which
indicates the need for iron replacement anyway. A TVUSS is not necessary unless the uterus is
enlarged, as it will not alter treatment (although in fact will often be ordered pragmatically to
present a diagnosis such as adenomysosis to the patients).
In women over the age of 45 EB is indicated as a small percentage will have an underlying
malignancy or endometrial hyperplasia.
2 A 32-year-old woman presents to her GP with regular HMB. She has two children and does not
want more at present. She is medically well and has no allergies. On examination she has a normal
sized uterus that is not tender.
What is the first-line treatment for HMB according to recent NICE guidelines? Choose the single
best answer.
A Endometrial ablation.
B The oral contraceptive pill.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

C The oral contraceptive pill used back to back.
D Northisterone.
E LNG-IUS.
ANSWER
E In women who do not wish to conceive, the LNG-IUS is recommended as a first-line treatment for
HMB. Endometrial ablation can be considered as a permanent solution in women where other
treatments have failed. Northisterone used regularly on days 6–26 of the cycle is likely to improve
symptoms but the side-effect profile is worse. The oral contraceptive pill may slightly reduce
blood flow.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

www.medicalebookpdf.com

CHAPTER 5

Implantation and early pregnancy
ANDREW HORNE

Implantation and the establishment of pregnancy
Other early pregnancy problems
Further reading
Self assessment

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
• Understand the social and emotional context of early pregnancy loss.
• Understand why a high suspicion of pregnancy is needed in all women of reproductive age with
symptoms.
• Obtain a detailed knowledge of the clinical presentation and management of miscarriage and
ectopic pregnancy.
• Obtain an awareness of less common early pregnancy conditions, including recurrent miscarriage,
gestational trophoblastic disease and hyperemesis gravidarum.

Implantation and the establishment of pregnancy
www.medicalebookpdf.com

After ovulation, the cells of the dominant follicle form the corpus luteum (CL) and the CL produces large
amounts of progesterone. Progesterone prepares the endometrium to support a pregnancy. Successful
implantation occurs when the oocyte is fertilized in the Fallopian tube and implants in the endometrium,
around 7 days after ovulation (Figure 5.1). The implanted blastocyst secretes human chorionic
gonadotrophin (hCG). Exponentially increasing hCG acts on the CL to rescue it from luteolysis to
maintain progesterone secretion, prevent menstruation and support the early conceptus. The CL supports
the pregnancy for approximately 8 weeks, after which the early placental tissue becomes the main source
of progesterone support.
hCG can be detected in the urine in sensitive pregnancy tests 1 or 2 days before the expected date of
menstruation. Most women delay taking a pregnancy test until after a missed period. However, it is
relatively common for positive pregnancy tests to occur just prior to the time of the expected period, and
for menstruation to occur as expected or 1 or 2 days later with a negative pregnancy test thereafter. This
transiently positive hCG is a result of pregnancy failure during the early stages of implantation and it is
known as a ‘biochemical pregnancy’.
A transvaginal ultrasound scan (TVUSS) can detect an early intrauterine gestational sac, the first sign
of a normal pregnancy, at around 5 weeks’ gestation. A few days later a circular yolk sac can be seen
within the gestational sac, and the embryonic fetus can usually be identified after 5.5 weeks’ gestation
(Figure 5.2). The fetal heartbeat may be visible as early as 6 weeks’ gestation.

Figure 5.1 Preimplantation development and intrauterine implantation.
eResource 5.1
Pregnancy between 5 and 12 weeks’ gestation
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv5.1.php

www.medicalebookpdf.com

• The gestational age is calculated from the last menstrual period (LMP) rather than the time of
conception. When someone is ‘6 weeks’ pregnant’, this means that they have conceived 4 weeks
previously ( assuming they have regular menstrual cycles). This is important as it sometimes causes
the patient some confusion.
• In the early stages of a normally developing intrauterine pregnancy, serum concentrations of hCG
will normally double every 48 hours.
• A normal pregnancy with serum hCG concentrations of >1,500 IU/l should be able to be confirmed
as intrauterine on a TVUSS.

Miscarriage
Miscarriage is a pregnancy that ends spontaneously before 24 weeks’ gestation.

Figure 5.2 Image of an early intrauterine pregnancy with yolk sac and pole (~5–6 weeks).

Clinical presentation
The most common sign of miscarriage is vaginal bleeding.

Incidence and aetiology
Miscarriage is common, occurring in 10–20% of clinical pregnancies, with the risk increasing with
maternal age. Clinically, miscarriages can be classified into different types based on the clinical
presentation and investigation findings. Table 5.1 illustrates the respective clinical presentation,
examination findings and management of the different types of miscarriages.

Table 5.1 Types of miscarriages with the relevant ultrasound findings and clinical
presentation
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Aetiological factors
• Chromosomal abnormalities.
• Medical/endocrine disorders.
• Uterine abnormalities.
• Infections.
• Drugs/chemicals.

Investigations
It is fundamentally important to assess the woman who is miscarrying clinically (‘ABC’, abdominopelvic
examination) in conjunction with the results of investigations below. It goes without saying that your
patient may be emotionally distraught, as well as distressed by her physical symptoms.
• Transabdominal/TVUSS: a single ultrasound scan can diagnose a miscarriage if there is a pregnancy
within the uterine cavity and certain criteria are met.
• Haemoglobin and ‘Group and Save’ (or cross-match if patient is severely compromised):
• measure to assess degree of vaginal loss and rhesus status.

Management
www.medicalebookpdf.com

A miscarriage can be managed using an expectant (natural), medical or a surgical approach, depending on
clinical presentation and patient choice.

Expectant management
Expectant management allows for the avoidance of surgery. After a spontaneous miscarriage where the
pain and bleeding resolve, a repeat ultrasound scan is not required to confirm completion. Women may be
advised to take a urinary pregnancy test after 3 weeks and attend if it is positive. Women undergoing
expectant management may require unplanned surgery if they start to bleed heavily.

Medical management
Medical treatment is increasingly used in an outpatient setting to allow women to miscarry at home. It
involves the administration of a single, or repeated, vaginal or sublingual dose of the prostaglandin E
analogue misoprostol. Some centres use pretreatment with the progesterone antagonist mifepristone (if
over 9 weeks’ gestation). The side-effects include pain, vomiting and diarrhoea, and women are routinely
provided with pain relief and antiemetics. As with expectant management, there is no need for routine
scan follow-up, although a post-treatment pregnancy test is recommended. Women undergoing medical
management of miscarriage need to understand that they may need surgical treatment if medical treatment
fails (10% failure rate) or if they bleed heavily.

Surgical management
Surgical management of miscarriage is preferred if there is persistent excessive bleeding or
haemodynamic instability, or if women favour this option. It can be done by manual vacuum aspiration
under local anaesthetic in an outpatient clinic setting if the woman is not compromised. More commonly it
is done as a day case in theatre under general anaesthesia. Vaginal or sublingual misoprostol is frequently
used to ripen the cervix to facilitate cervical dilatation for suction curette insertion and reduce the risk of
trauma and haemorrhage. However, surgical evacuation has its drawbacks including risks such as uterine
perforation, postoperative pelvic infection and cervical trauma and subsequent cervical incompetence
(see Chapter 17, Gynaecological surgery and therapeutics).

Counselling
Miscarriage can be a very distressing experience and the psychological impact, sense of bereavement and
feelings of depression and anxiety should not be underestimated. Patients who have suffered miscarriages
should be counselled to ensure that they understand that most miscarriages are non-recurrent and that they
are not to blame for their loss.

Recurrent miscarriage
Recurrent miscarriage is defined as the loss of three or more consecutive pregnancies and it affects 1% of
couples. Risk factors for recurrent miscarriage include both advancing maternal and paternal age, obesity,
balanced chromosomal translocations, uterine structural anomalies and antiphospholipid syndrome
(APS). Investigation of recurrent miscarriage should involve testing for antiphospholipid antibodies and
imaging of the uterus. Products of conception in subsequent miscarriages should be sent for cytogenetic
analysis and, where testing reports an unbalanced structural chromosomal abnormality, parental
www.medicalebookpdf.com

peripheral blood karyotyping of both partners should be performed. Aspirin and low-dose heparin can
reduce the miscarriage rate in women with APS by 50%. Balanced translocations may be overcome by
preimplantation genetic diagnosis or gamete donation. Congenital uterine abnormalities, including uterine
septum and cervical incompetence, may be amenable to surgery. Although treatment with progesterone,
corticosteroids or metformin has been advocated, there is insufficient evidence to recommend their use at
present. Most couples have normal investigations and the value of psychological support and serial
ultrasound scans during pregnancy has been demonstrated in several non-randomized studies.

Ectopic pregnancy
Definition
An ectopic pregnancy (EP) is defined as the implantation of a pregnancy outside the normal uterine cavity.
Over 98% implant in the Fallopian tube (Figure 5.3). Rarely, ectopic pregnancies can implant in the
interstitium of the tube, ovary, cervix, abdominal cavity or in caesarean section scars. A heterotopic
pregnancy is the simultaneous development of two pregnancies: one within and one outside the uterine
cavity.
eResource 5.2
Ectopic pregnancy
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv5.2.php

Figure 5.3 Image of tubal ectopic pregnancy taken at laparoscopy.

Incidence and aetiology
One in 80 pregnancies are ectopic. They account for 9–13% of maternal deaths in the Western world and
10–30% in low resource countries. The incidence of a heterotopic pregnancy in the general population is
low (1:25,000–30,000), but significantly higher after in-vitro fertilization (IVF) treatment (1%) due to the
transfer of two blastocysts.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Aetiological factors for ectopic pregnancy
• Fallopian tube damage due to pelvic infection (e.g. Chlamydia/Gonorrhoea), previous ectopic
pregnancy and previous tubal surgery.
• Functional alterations in the Fallopian tube due to smoking and increased maternal age.
• Additional risk factors include previous abdominal surgery (e.g. appendicectomy, caesarean
section), subfertility, IVF, use of intrauterine contraceptive devices, endometriosis, conception on
oral contraceptive/morning after pill.

Clinical presentation
The majority of patients with an EP present with a subacute clinical picture of abdominal pain and/or
vaginal bleeding in early pregnancy. Rarely, patients present very acutely with rupture of the EP and
massive intraperitoneal bleeding. The free blood in the peritoneal cavity can cause diaphragmatic
irritation and shoulder tip pain.The diagnosis of ruptured EP is usually clear as they present with signs of
an acute abdomen and hypovolaemic shock with a positive PT. It is, however, important to be aware that
it is common for women to experience bleeding or abdominal pain with a viable intrauterine pregnancy.

Investigations
The following are useful investigations for the diagnosis of EP. Nonetheless, again, it is fundamentally
important to assess the woman clinically (‘ABC’, abdominopelvic examination) in conjunction with the
results of investigations to manage the patient.
• TVUSS: identification of an intrauterine pregnancy (intrauterine gestation sac, yolk sac +/− fetal pole)
on TVUSS effectively excludes the possibility of an EP in most patients except in those patients with
rare heterotopic pregnancy. A TVUSS showing an empty uterus with an adnexal mass has a sensitivity of
90% and specificity of 95% in the diagnosis of EP. The presence of moderate to significant free fluid
during TVUSS is suggestive of a ruptured EP.
• Serum hCG: the serum hCG level almost doubles every 48 hours in a normally developing intrauterine
pregnancy. In patients with EP, the rise of hCG is often suboptimal. However, hCG levels can vary
widely in individuals and thus consecutive measurements 48 hours apart are often required for
comparison purposes.
• Haemoglobin and ‘Group and Save’ (or cross-match if patient is severely compromised):
• measure to assess degree of intra-abdominal bleeding and rhesus status.

Pregnancy of unknown location
• In up to 40% of women with an EP the diagnosis is not made on first attendance and they are
labelled as having a ‘pregnancy of unknown location’ (PUL).
• A PUL is a working diagnosis defined as an empty uterus with no evidence of an adnexal mass on
TVUSS (in a patient with a positive pregnancy test).
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• The mainstay of investigation of a PUL is consecutive measurement of serum hCG concentrations.
An endometrial biopsy can occasionally be helpful when hCG levels are static. All PUL must be
investigated to determine the location of the pregnancy.

Management
An EP can be managed using an expectant, medical or a surgical approach, depending on clinical
presentation and patient choice.

Expectant management
Expectant management is based on the assumption that a significant proportion of all EPs will resolve
without any treatment. This option is suitable for patients who are haemodynamically stable and
asymptomatic (and remain so). The patient requires serial hCG measurements until levels are
undetectable.

Medical management
Intramuscular methotrexate is a treatment option for patients with minimal symptoms, an adnexal mass
<40 mm in diameter and a current serum hCG concentration under 3,000 IU/l. Methotrexate is a folic acid
antagonist that inhibits deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) synthesis, particularly affecting trophoblastic cells.
The dose of methotrexate is calculated based on the patient’s body surface area and is 50 mg/m2. After
methotrexate treatment serum hCG is usually routinely measured on days 4, 7 and 11, then weekly
thereafter until undetectable (levels need to fall by 15% between day 4 and 7, and continue to fall with
treatment). Medical treatment should therefore only be offered if facilities are present for regular followup visits. The few contraindications to medical treatment include: (1) chronic liver, renal or
haematological disorder; (2) active infection; (3) immunodeficiency; and (4) breastfeeding. There are
also known side-effects such as stomatitis, conjunctivitis, gastrointestinal upset and photosensitive skin
reaction, and about two-thirds of patients will suffer from non-specific abdominal pain. It is important to
advise women to avoid sexual intercourse during treatment and to avoid conceiving for 3 months after
methotrexate treatment because of the risk of teratogenicity. It is also important to advise them to avoid
alcohol and prolonged exposure to sunlight during treatment.

Surgical management
The standard surgical treatment approach is laparoscopy (Figure 5.3). Laparotomy is reserved for
severely compromised patients or where there are no endoscopic facilities. The operation of choice is
removal of the Fallopian tube and the EP within (salpingectomy), or in some cases a small opening can be
made over the site of the EP and the EP extracted via this opening (salpingostomy). Salpingostomy is
recommended only if the contralateral tube is absent or visibly damaged, and it is associated with a
higher rate of subsequent EP. Pregnancy rates subsequently remain high if the contralateral tube is normal
because the oocyte can be picked up by the ipsilateral or contralateral tube.

Anti-D administration
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• Rhesus isoimmunization can occur after early pregnancy problems and there are some circumstances
where women who are rhesus negative require anti-D prophylaxis.
• All rhesus-negative women who have a surgical procedure to manage an EP or miscarriage should
be offered anti-D immunoglobulin at a dose of 50 µg (250 IU) as soon as possible and within 72
hours of the surgery.
• A Kleihauer test is not needed to quantify fetomaternal haemorrhage in the first trimester of
pregnancy.
• Anti-D is not required for threatened, incomplete or complete natural miscarriage.
• Anti-D may not be required after the medical management of miscarriage or EP but guidelines differ,
and prophylaxis is often given.

Table 5.2 Summary of other early pregnancy disorders
Disorder

Gestational
trophoblastic
disease (GTD)
(abnormal
trophoblast
proliferation)

Definition

Spectrum of conditions
that includes complete
and partial hyatidiform
mole, invasive mole
and choriocarcinoma

Hyperemesis
gravidarum

Risk factors

Clinical
presentation

Management

Previous
molar
pregnancy
High or low
maternal
age
Asian origin

Ultrasound
features of
intrauterine
vesicles
(‘cluster of
grapes’)
Persistently
raised hCG
levels after
miscarriage

Registration
Uterine evacuation
by suction
curettage (without
misoprostol)
Serial hCG
measurements
Avoid oestrogens

Multiple
pregnancies
GTD

Excessive
nausea and
vomiting,
often
accompanied
by
dehydration

Antiemetics
Fluid and electrolyte
replacement
Multivitamins
Thromboprophylaxis

hCG, human chorionic gonadotrophin.

Other early pregnancy problems
Table 5.2 summarizes other less common early pregnancy disorders. It is important to remember that nongynaecological conditions, such as urinary tract infection and medical/surgical problems (e.g.
appendicitis), can present in early pregnancy.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Further reading
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. NICE Clinical Guideline 154: Ectopic pregnancy
and miscarriage.
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Green-top Guideline 38: The Management of
Gestational Trophoblastic Disease.
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Green-top Guideline 17: The Investigation and
Treatment of Couples with Recurrent First-trimester and Second-trimester Miscarriage.

Self assessment
CASE HISTORY
Mrs M is a 32-year-old woman who presents after 6 weeks of amenorrhoea with abdominal pain and
dizziness. Her observations on admission are blood pressure 90/50 mmHg, pulse 115/min,
temperature 36.9ºC. She has a positive urinary pregnancy test.
A What is your differential diagnosis?
B What are the key points in her history, examination and investigation?
C Discuss her management.
ANSWERS
A EP. The findings of cardiovascular instability, in the presence of pregnancy, are an ectopic until
proven otherwise.
B An EP should be suspected in any woman of reproductive age who presents with symptoms. This
patient has classical symptoms of ectopic pregnancy: pain and dizziness. She also has signs of
hypovolaemic shock. She has a positive urinary pregnancy test.
C ‘ABC’. The patient should have a large bore cannula inserted and be given IV fluids. Bloods
should be taken for full blood count (FBC) and ‘Group and Save’. She should remain nil by mouth.
She requires an abdominopelvic examination. A senior colleague should be informed about her
admission and the possibility of her requiring an urgent laparoscopy.
The patient had a laparoscopy and was discovered to have a large right ruptured EP in her
Fallopian tube with 1.5 litres of blood in her pelvis. She had a salpingectomy and subsequently
recovered well.

EMQ
A TVUSS.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

B Serum hCG levels.
C Midstream urine collection (MSU).
D FBC.
E Suction currettage of uterus.
F Misoprostol.
G Methotrexate.
H Salpingectomy.
I Abdominal X-ray.
J Avoid oestrogens.
For each description below, choose the SINGLE most appropriate answer from the above list of
options. Each option may be used once, more than once or not at all.
1 Investigation of pain in early pregnancy.
2 Management of EP.
3 Management of miscarriage.
4 Management of suspected hyatidiform mole.
ANSWERS
1 A, B, C, D. A TVUSS will establish the location of the pregnancy, but if the gestation sac cannot be
seen, series hCG measurements will help. An MSU will diagnose a uterine tract infection, which
is a common cause of pain in pregnancy
2 D, G, H. FBC is essential in management of an ectopic as a baseline. Depending on the size of the
ectopic and the symptoms, medical management with methotrexate or surgical with salpingectomy
may be indicated.
3 D, E, F. Baseline FBC is essential in management of a miscarriage in case there is excessive blood
loss. The decision for suction curettage or misoprostol is made according to the preference of the
patient.
4 E, J. Suction curettage is essential for histological diagnosis and maximal evacuation.
Subsequently, oestrogens should be avoided to prevent risk of choriocarcinoma.

SBA QUESTIONS
1 A 25-year-old woman presents with vaginal bleeding and a positive pregnancy test. Her TVUSS
shows a non-viable intrauterine pregnancy. What would it be reasonable to offer her? Choose the
single best answer.
A Laparoscopy.
B Serum hCG measurement.
C Misoprostol.
D Methotrexate.
E Progesterone.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

ANSWER
C The non-viable pregnancy should be removed with suction curettage or by administration of
misoprostol. hCG has no role here as it is used only to help manage a PUL or monitor an ectopic.
Laparoscopy is not relevant as there is no suggestion of an EP. Methotrexate is not used for an
intrauterine pregnancy, and progesterone should not be used in the presence of a non-viable
pregnancy, as it will only prolong the time to completion of miscarriage.
2 A 43-year-old woman undergoes a surgical curettage for miscarriage and the pathology report
confirms a partial mole. What would you do? Choose the single best answer.
A Register the patient at a nationally recognized centre for treatment of gestational trophoblastic
disease.
B Start the COCP.
C Prescribe methotrexate.
D Arrange an urgent TVUSS.
E Start serial hCG monitoring.
F Start antibiotics.
ANSWER
A All moles, partial and full, are registered via the recognized centre, who perform hCG monitoring
themselves. Oestrogens should be avoided in women with molar pregnancy. TVUSS will not be
necessary as evacuation of the uterus has been performed. Antibiotics and methotrexate have no
role in the monitoring of a molar pregnancy.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

www.medicalebookpdf.com

CHAPTER 6

Contraception and abortion
SHARON CAMERON

Introduction
Contraceptive targets in the female reproductive tract
Methods of contraception
Abortion
Further reading
Self assessment

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
• Understand the mechanism of action of current contraceptive methods.
• Describe factors that affect contraceptive effectiveness.
• Understand the non-contraceptive benefits of methods.
• Remember the use of medical eligibility criteria for contraception.
• Understand the mechanism of action of modern medical methods of abortion.
• Describe common complications of abortion.
• Understand the importance of postabortal contraception.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Introduction
Correct and consistent use of effective methods of contraception can prevent most unintended
pregnancies. Abortion is a major consequence of unintended pregnancy, and in many low- and middleincome countries that restrict abortion, abortions are often performed under unsafe conditions and result
in women dying or suffering serious injuries. Unintended pregnancies can also lead to delayed or no
antenatal care, which can pose health risks to both mothers and infants. It is estimated that there are 22
million unsafe abortions each year, approximately 47,000 deaths from unsafe abortion and 5 million
women suffer injury/disability from unsafe abortion. These are preventable through contraception and, as
a back-up, access to safe abortion.

Global unmet need for contraception
• Over 200 million women worldwide would like to avoid a pregnancy, but are not using an effective
method of contraception. This is due to a lack of supplies, cultural and political barriers and poor
quality of services.
• Estimated 22 million unsafe abortions each year.
• Approximately 47,000 deaths from unsafe abortion.
• 5 million women suffer injury/disability from unsafe abortion.

Contraceptive targets in the female reproductive tract
In order to prevent pregnancy, contraceptive methods could be developed to target one or a number of key
reproductive processes or sites in the male or female reproductive tract. None of the existing methods of
contraception are 100% effective at preventing pregnancy. The effectiveness of a method depends on both
mechanism of action and correct and consistent use. Compliance depends on acceptability of the method
to the user and tolerability with any untoward effects that they experience related to use of the method.
Even in high-income countries such as the UK, where contraception is free and a range of methods are
readily available, unintended pregnancy rates remain high. Many women who present with an unintended
pregnancy have used a method, but it is usually a method of low effectiveness (e.g. condom) or a method
that has been used incorrectly or inconsistently (e.g. missed oral contraceptive pills). Uptake of existing
methods is limited by their acceptability to women and for many methods discontinuation rates are high.
A woman’s choice of contraception is just as likely to be based upon information from media, friends
and family, as from a health care professional. The most effective methods of contraception are the longacting reversible methods of contraception (LARC) – or so called ‘fit and forget methods’ such as the
copper intrauterine device (Cu-IUD), levonorgestrel intrauterine system (LNG-IUS) and progestogen-only
implant. Unfortunately, myths and misconceptions amongst both women and health care professionals
surrounding use of LARC, are major factors that limit their uptake. Education, dispelling myths and
promoting the significant non-contraceptive benefits of LARC methods could improve uptake and
continuation, and have the potential to prevent many more unintended pregnancies for more women.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Mechanism of action
The current available methods of contraception work in the following ways:
• Prevent ovulation: this is the mechanism of action of the following methods: combined hormonal
methods (pill, patch and vaginal ring), progestogen-only injectables, progestogen-only implant
(Nexplanon®), oral emergency contraception, lactational amenorrhoea.
• Prevent sperm reaching the oocyte: female sterilization and male sterilization (vasectomy).
• Prevent an embryo implanting in the uterus: this is a mechanism of action of the Cu-IUD and LNG-IUS.
• Allow sperm into the vagina but poison them: mechanism of action of spermicides.
• Allow sperm into the vagina but block further passage: mechanism of action of diaphragm and cap. Also
one of the mechanisms of action of progestogens.
• Prevent sperm entering the vagina:
• male and female condoms;
• avoid sex during the fertile time of the cycle;
• fertility awareness-based methods (FAB).

Efficacy and effectiveness
The efficacy of a method depends on its mechanism of action. However, real-life effectiveness depends
on compliance and continuation with the method. Compliance is influenced by the route of administration;
some methods are easier to use than others. Continuation with a method depends on the acceptability to
the user. The most effective method for a woman (or couple), therefore, is a method that will be used
correctly and consistently.
Failure rates during perfect use show how effective methods can be, where perfect use is defined as
following the directions for use. Failure rates during typical use show how effective the different methods
are during actual use (including inconsistent or incorrect use).
Table 6.1 shows estimates of the probabilities of pregnancy during the first year of typical use of each
method (based upon data from the USA). For some methods, such as implants and intrauterine
contraceptives, the efficacy is high and proper and consistent use is nearly guaranteed once inserted, that
extremely low pregnancy rates are found in all studies. For other methods, such as the oral contraceptive
pill and progestogen-only injectable, efficacy is high, but they can potentially be misused (e.g. forgetting
to take pills or failure to get repeat injections). Characteristics of the user that determine risk of pregnancy
include compliance, age (reducing fertility in late 30s) and frequency of intercourse.

Table 6.1 Percentage of women experiencing an unintended pregnancy within the first
year of use with typical use and perfect use

www.medicalebookpdf.com

LARC have been defined in the UK as a method that requires administration less than once per month
(i.e injectable, implant, intrauterine device [IUD]), although in many other countries, the injectable is not
considered as LARC, but as a ’medium acting’ method. LARC methods are the most effective as once
inserted they do not require any action by the user until they need to be renewed (3 years for the implant
Nexplanon® and 5–10 years or longer for IUDs). In contrast, the shorter-acting methods do require
compliance by the user (e.g. to take a daily pill, change a weekly patch or use a condom for every act of
sex). Unfortunately, reminders to the user such as daily SMS/text about when to take the next pill or
letters/phone calls about when the next injectable is due, do not appear to improve compliance with these
methods. Discontinuation rates of short-acting methods (pill, patch and ring) and even the progestogenonly injectable, are all high, with approximately one-half of users stopping this method by 1 year. In
contrast, discontinuation rates of LARC are lower, with studies reporting that 80% or more of women still
use the implant/IUD at 1 year.
LARC methods have ‘typical’ failure rates within the first 12 months of use that are similar to those of
‘perfect’ failure rates. In contrast, for short-acting methods typical failure rates are much higher than
perfect failure rates. Real life typical failure rates should be used when providing information to women
about the effectiveness of a method. The use of simple diagrams can help put effectiveness of a method
into context. Without contraception, approximately 85% of couples will conceive within 12 months.

Safety
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Most women who use contraception are fit and healthy. However, some health conditions may be
associated with real or theoretical risks if a particular contraceptive method affects the health condition.
In an attempt to produce a set of international norms for providing contraception to individuals with a
range of medical conditions that may contraindicate a contraceptive method, the World Health
Organization (WHO) developed a system addressing medical eligibility criteria for contraceptive use.
The WHO Medical eligibility criteria for contraceptive use (MEC) is a guidance document that contains
recommendations for whether or not women with given medical conditions are eligible to use a particular
contraceptive method, based upon on evidence and also expert consensus opinion. The MEC categories
are 1–4 and are shown in Table 6.2A. Category 1 includes conditions for which there is no restriction for
the use of the method while category 4 includes conditions that represent an unacceptable health risk if the
contraceptive method is used (absolutely contraindicated). Table 6.2B shows some MEC 4 conditions for
use of the combined hormonal contraception (CHC). For some conditions the MEC category may differ
depending on whether the condition was pre-existing when the contraceptive was initiated or developed
during use of the method. If a woman develops a condition while using a method of contraception, then it
is possible that the method contributed to the onset of the condition and she may need to stop using it.
However, if a woman with a particular condition (which often makes pregnancy less safe) wishes to start
a method of contraception, there may be less of an issue with safety.

Table 6.2A Medical eligibility criteria (modified from WHO)
MEC
category

Definition of category

1

A condition for which there is no restriction for the use of the contraceptive method

2

A condition where the advantages of the method generally outweigh the theoretical or
proven risks

3

A condition where the theoretical or proven risks generally outweigh the advantages of
using the method
The provision of a method requires expert clinical judgement and/or referral to a
specialist contraceptive provider, since use of the method is not usually recommended
unless other more appropriate methods are not available or not acceptable

4

A condition that represents an unacceptable health risk if the contraceptive method is
used

Interaction with other medicines
There are a number of medicines (some anticonvulsants, antifungals, antiretrovirals and antibiotics) that
induce liver enzymes cytochrome P450, and will reduce the efficacy of hormonal contraception such as
CHC pills, patch or ring, progestogen-only implant and progestogen-only pill (POP) (Table 6.3). If a
woman using enzyme-inducing medication wishes to use one of these hormonal methods, then the
consistent use of condoms is also advised. Alternatively, she could consider use of the progestogen-only
injectable, Cu-IUD or LNG-IUS, since efficacy of these methods is not affected by drugs that are enzyme
www.medicalebookpdf.com

inducers. Effectiveness of the combined oral contraceptive pill (COCP) (and all other methods) is not
affected by administration of most broad-spectrum antibiotics.

Table 6.2B Examples of WHO medical eligibility criteria category 4 conditions and use of
combined hormonal contraception

Table 6.3 Drugs known to decrease efficacy of hormonal contraception through
induction of liver enzymes (oral contraceptive pills, patch, ring and implant)
Type of drug

Liver enzyme induction

Anticonvulsant

Carbamazepine
Eslicarbazepine
Oxcarbazepine
Phenobarbital
Phenytoin
Primidone
Topiramate

Antibiotic

Rifampicin
Rifabutin

Antifungal

Griseofulvin
Protease inhibitors
Amprenavir
Atazanavir
Nelfinavir
Lopinavir
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Antiretroviral

Saquinavir
Ritonavir
Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors
Efavirenz
Nevirapine

Side-effects
Common side-effects that women report with all hormonal methods are unexpected bleeding, weight gain,
headaches, mood swings and loss of libido. Concern about weight gain and women attributing weight gain
to hormonal contraception have been shown to be one of the greatest perceived disadvantages of
hormonal contraception. With the exception of the progestogen-only injectable in adolescents, there is no
good evidence that hormonal methods cause weight gain. There is no evidence that intrauterine methods
(Cu-IUD or LNG-IUS) cause weight gain. Furthermore, there is no good evidence that hormonal
contraception has adverse effects upon either mood or libido.
Unexpected bleeding is common (15%) when women start a COCP and may settle with time. If not,
there is some evidence that changing to a different contraceptive pill with a different dose of hormones
may help. If bleeding problems persist for more than 3 months, then current guidelines from the UK would
advise investigations to exclude other causes (e.g. cervical conditions such as polyps, chlamydial
infection or intrauterine cavity lesions such as submucous fibroids or polyps).
If women using the COCP experience headaches in the pill-free week, then they may benefit from
continuing packets of pills to avoid the hormone-free interval. If headaches develop during use of a
hormonal method that are severe, frequent or migraine, then changing method of contraception is
advisable.

Non-contraceptive health benefits
Hormonal contraceptives may be used for their beneficial side-effects, in which case the risk-benefit ratio
changes(Table 6.4). Barrier methods, particularly condoms, protect against sexually transmitted
infections.

Acceptability
This determines whether women choose to start a method and whether they continue to use that method.
Determinants of method acceptability include: personal characteristics (e.g. age), fertility intentions (e.g.
if planning a baby sooner, later or not at all), perceptions of effectiveness, perceptions of safety, fear of
side-effects, familiarity with the method, experience of others (e.g. friends and family), ease of use, ease
of access including whether or not they need to see a health professional to obtain the method, perceived
intrusiveness and non-contraceptive benefits of the method (e.g. reduction in menstrual flow or pain).

Table 6.4 Non-contraceptive health benefits of hormonal contraception
Method

Benefit against
www.medicalebookpdf.com

LNG-IUS (52 mg)

Heavy menstrual bleeding
Endometriosis
Adenomyosis
Dysmenorrhoea
Endometrial protection
Simple hyperplasia

Combined hormonal contraception

Heavy menstrual bleeding
Irregular menses
Hirsutism
Acne
Premenstrual syndrome
Reduces risk of ovarian cancer
Reduces risk of endometrial
cancer

Progestogen-only injectable (depot medroxyprogesterone
acetate)

Heavy menstrual bleeding
Endometriosis
Dysmenorrhoea

Determinants of contraceptive method acceptability
• Personal characteristics (e.g. age).
• Fertility intentions.
• Perceptions of effectiveness.
• Perceptions of safety.
• Fear of side-effects.
• Familiarity.
• Experience of others.
• Ease of use and of access.
• Need to see a health professional.
• Intrusiveness.
• Non-contraceptive benefits.

Practical prescribing
Women considering using a particular method of contraception require clear, accurate information, ideally
backed up with written information. The information provided should cover the aspects shown in Table
6.5.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Table 6.5 What a woman needs to know before starting a method of contraception
• How to use the method (pill, patch or ring) and what to do when misused (e.g. missed pill)
• Typical failure rates
• Common side-effects
• Health benefits
• Fertility return on stopping
• When she requires review

Methods of contraception
Combined hormonal contraception
CHC methods contain two hormones: an oestrogen and a progestogen. They are available as oral pills, a
transdermal patch and as a vaginal ring. They are similar in terms of effectiveness, safety and side-effects.
These methods all work by inhibition of ovulation via negative feedback of oestrogen and progestogen on
the pituitary, with suppression of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH).

Pills
Most of the commonly used COCPs are ‘low dose’ and contain ethinyl oestradiol in a dose of 15–35 µg
(Figure 6.1). Some newer pills contain oestradiol valerate or oestradiol hemihydrate, which is more
similar in structure to the ‘naturally occurring’ oestradiol, but confers no other proven benefits.
Most ‘traditional’ preparations contain 21 pills followed by a 7-day pill-free interval (or 7 placebo
tablets in place of a 7-day pill-free interval). Some preparations contain 24 days of pills with a shorter
pill-free interval. Preparations are commonly monophasic (i.e. same dose of hormones throughout), but
some are phasic (dose varies). There is no advantage of phasic preparations over monophasic
preparations. Although traditional 21 days on and 7 days off usually results in a withdrawal bleed during
the pill-free interval, there is no reason why women cannot take the pill continuously. Women with
dysmenorrhoea or headaches during the pill-free interval, are often advised to do so to avoid recurrence
of symptoms during the hormone-free interval by tricycling (taking three packets without any break).
Tailored pill use is also often recommended. This is where women continue to take the pill until they
want to start a bleeding episode. They then have the pill-free interval at this time.
The progestogens that are used in currently available pills are often referred to as second-generation
(levonorgestrel, norethisterone), third-generation (gestodene desogestrel) and fourth-generation
progestogens (drospirenone and dienogest). Newer (third-and fourth-generation) progestogens were
www.medicalebookpdf.com

developed to have advantages due to less androgenic activity, but seem to be associated with a higher risk
of venous thrombosis than pills containing second-generation progestogens. In view of this, COCPs
containing second-generation progestogens are generally recommended as first choice.

Patch and ring
The combined hormonal transdermal patch releases 33.9 µg ethinyloestradiol/day and norelgestromin 203
µg/day. It is applied to the skin of the lower abdomen, buttock or arm for 7 days, although it can be
applied to any skin covered area, except the breast (Figure 6.2A). The regimen usually involves
application of patches for a total of 21 days followed by a 7-day hormone-free interval. Continued use
(tricycling or tailored use) is also possible. Some women may experience problems with patch adherence
or skin sensitivity to the patch.
The combined hormonal ring is a flexible ring of 54 mm diameter that releases 15 µg ethinyloestradiol
and 120 µg etonorgestrel daily, and as such is the lowest dose combined hormonal method (Figure 6.2B).
The ring is self inserted and worn in the vagina for 21 days, followed by a 7-day hormone-free interval,
during which a withdrawal bleeding occurs. Women should not feel discomfort from the ring and it can be
removed for a short time (less than 3 hours) and can be cleaned and replaced.

Figure 6.1 The oral contraceptive pill.

Figure 6.2 A: Combined hormonal patch. B: combined hormonal vaginal contraceptive ring.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 6.3 Missed pill guidelines. (Adapted from Faculty of Sexual and Reproductive Healthcare, CEU
Statement, 2011.)

Missed pills, patches and rings
Missed pills are common and if two or more are missed, then this places a woman at risk of ovulation.
Additional contraceptive cover (condoms or abstinence) is required for most monophasic
ethinyloestradiol-containing pills during the next 7 days of pill taking (Figure 6.3). Additional
precautions are also required if a patch is not applied for 48 hours or a ring for more than 3 hours. If
unprotected sexual intercourse has occurred during this time then there is a risk of pregnancy and so
emergency contraception (see below) is recommended.

Table 6.6 Route of administration of contraceptive and duration
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Length of action
The length of action has an influence on the acceptability and efficacy and is shown in Table 6.6.

Safety of CHC
Cancer
Cancer risks among users of COCPs
• A 12% reduction in the risk of any cancer.
• Reduced risk of colorectal cancer.
• Reduced risk of endometrial cancer.
• Reduced risk of ovarian cancer.
• Increased risk of breast cancer during use (decreases on stopping and similar risk to never used by
10 years after stopping).
• Increased risk of cervical cancer (but early changes detected by cervical cytology and human
papillomavirus [HPV] vaccination).
Large observational studies have shown that women who are current or ever users of COCPs have a
12% reduction in their risk of death from any cancer. Ever use of oral contraception has been associated
with a 46% reduced risk of ovarian cancer compared to never use, and with 10 years use of COCP there
is a halving of the risk of ovarian cancer. This protection is also evident for women with a family history
of breast cancer (who may be particularly at risk of ovarian cancer). In the same studies, the risk of
endometrial cancer was almost halved amongst women who had ever used the contraceptive pill
www.medicalebookpdf.com

compared to never users. Reduction in the risk of colon cancer was also observed. The reason for this
reduction in risk of cancers with contraceptive pill use is not known. Protection against ovarian cancer
could be due to the suppression of follicular rupture from the surface of the ovary each month. Protection
against endometrial cancer could be due to the progestogen content of the pill, which opposes the
mitogenic effects of oestrogen on the endometrium.
This protection against ovarian and endometrial cancer seems to persist for more than 15 years after
stopping the pill.
Most (but not all) observational studies have reported an increase in the risk of breast cancer amongst
current users of the COCPs. A meta-analysis of observational studies of breast cancer in women and
hormonal contraception suggests that current users of COCPs have an increased risk of breast cancer
while taking the pill, but that soon after discontinuing this risk diminishes, so that their risk 10 years after
stopping is the same as a women who never used the pill. It has been suggested that starting to use the pill
may accelerate the appearance of breast cancer in susceptible women. Alternatively, women using the pill
might have their tumours diagnosed earlier, although it is difficult to explain why a tendency to earlier
diagnosis would persist for years after stopping. Nevertheless, a biological effect of CHC on the breast
remains a possibility.
Observational studies have also reported an increase in the risk of cervical cancer amongst users of
COCPs. While this may be due to confounding factors such as users being less likely to use condoms (that
protect against HPV), a biological association cannot be excluded. However, women can be reassured
that participating in a cervical screening programme can detect precancerous cells that can be effectively
treated. Having HPV vaccination (against oncogenic HPV subtypes 16 and 18) before sexual activity
commences, using condoms and not smoking also reduces the risk of cervical cancer.

Venous thromboembolism and arterial disease
CHC (pill, patch and ring) increases the tendency to thrombosis in both the venous and arterial
circulation. The adverse effect on venous thrombosis is related to the dose of oestrogen and appears less
with combined pills containing second-generation progestogens compared to those containing third- or
fourth-generation progestogens. However, whichever progestogen is used, the absolute risk of venous
thromboembolism (VTE) is very small and much less than that associated with pregnancy (see box
highlighted below).

Risk of VTE in users and non-users of CHC
• 5 per 10,000 in non-pregnant non users.
• 10 per 10,0000 COCP users.
• 29–400 per 10,0000 in pregnant/postpartum.
The risk of VTE is greatest during the first year of use, possibly due to the unmasking of inherited
thrombophilias. Screening for known thrombophilias is not cost effective, but women should be asked
about a personal and family history of VTE if considering using this method, as these are
contraindications to using a CHC method. Women who are using CHC and making long-distance travel
(>3 h of immobility) should take appropriate exercise on the journey and consider wearing graduated
compression socks.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Arterial disease is much less common but more serious. It is related to age, and the risk is strongly
influenced by smoking. Women over 35 years old who smoke are not eligible to use a CHC method. The
combined pill is also contraindicated in women who experience migraine with aura (homonymous
hemianopia, unilateral paraesthesia, weakness, aphasia or unclassifiable speech disorder occurring
before the headache), since this condition is associated with cerebral vasospasm and women may be at
higher risk of stroke if they use a CHC.

Progestogen-only contraceptive methods
Progestogen-only methods are available as oral, injectable, implant and intrauterine system. The
mechanism of action of the method and the bleeding pattern appear to depend on the dose of progestogen
and also the route of administration.
The injectable, implant and desogestrel-containing POP inhibit ovulation. Lower-dose POP
formulations inhibit ovulation only inconsistently. All progestogen-only contraceptive methods, regardless
of the route of administration, thicken cervical mucus so reducing sperm penetrability and transport. The
levonorgestrel intrauterine system (LNG-IUS) has little effect on ovarian activity but causes marked
endometrial atrophy, which prevents implantation if ovulation and fertilization occur.

Progestogen-only pill
Unlike the COCP, the POP needs to be taken continuously. Medium-dose pills (e.g. containing
desogestrel) inhibit ovulation in 99% of cycles, but lower-dose pills inhibit ovulation in less than onehalf of cycles, relying on the cervical mucus effect for contraception. Side-effects of all POPs include
possible irregular bleeding, persistent ovarian follicles (simple cysts) and acne.
If a POP is missed then the woman should continue taking the POP and use extra precautions (e.g.
condoms) for the next 48 hours until the progestogen effect on the mucus is built up. If unprotected sex
occurs during this time, then emergency contraception is required.

Implant
A single rod (Nexplanon®) containing the progestogen etonorgestrel is the currently available method in
the UK. Nexplanon® contains 68 mg of 3-keto-desogestrel (a metabolite of desogestrel) providing
contraception for 3 years. The initial release rate of 60–70 μg/day falls gradually to around 25–30 μg/day
at the end of 3 years. Implants that are in use in other parts of the world include Uniplant® (single rod,
nomegestrol, lasts 1 year) and Jadelle® (two rods, levonorgestrel, lasts 3–5 years).
Nexplanon® is a flexible rod, similar in size to a match stick (40 mm × 2 mm) and is inserted
subdermally 8 cm above the medical epicondyle, usually of the non-dominant arm (Figure 6.4). Insertion
is conducted under local anaesthesia using a specially designed insertion device. Nevertheless, poor
insertion technique can still result in deep insertion with consequent difficult removal, so insertion should
only be conducted by clinicians who have undertaken appropriate training. The implant is not usually
visible, but should be easily palpable. Nexplanon® contains a small quantity of barium, which permits it
to be visualized by X-ray. It can also be localized using low-frequency ultrasound probes, which can help
aid removal of implants that are not easily palpable.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 6.4 Nexplanon.
Once inserted, there is no need for any routine follow-up until the device is due for replacement or the
user wishes it removed. Nexplanon® releases a steady low dose of progestogen (similar to levels of a
POP). After removal, serum levels of etonorgestrel levels are undetectable within 1 week, and fertility is
restored immediately after removal.

Progestogen-only injectable
The most commonly used injectable worldwide is a depot injection of medroxyprogesterone acetate,
which can be administered intramuscularly (buttock, upper arm, lower abdomen) as the formulation
Depoprovera® (150 mg) or subcutaneously as the micronized lower-dose formulation of Sayana press®
(104 mg). Both intramuscular and subcutaneous preparations have similar features: same mode of action
(inhibition of ovulation), same efficacy, similar injection interval (every 12–14 weeks) and similar
bleeding pattern (over 50% amenorrhoea rates at 1 year). Since subcutaneous injections are easier to
give, this preparation offers the possibility of training users to self administer, and also increases the
range of health care professionals who can give the injection (e.g. trained pharmacists). This can increase
access to this method for women, and may increase its acceptability (Figure 6.5).
The injectable is the only hormonal method that may delay return of fertility after discontinuation. In
some cases it may take up to 1 year after the last injection for ovulation to return. There is no permanent
impairment of fertility but this delay makes the injectable an inappropriate method for women wishing
short-term contraception.

Figure 6.5 Sayana®-press single-dose container.
Both the intramuscular and subcutaneous preparation may cause weight gain in a minority of women
and loss of bone mineral density (BMD) (5% loss of BMD at lumbar spine) in the first few years of use.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

However, women should be advised that BMD loss seems to plateau, has not been associated with
osteoporotic fractures and appears to be reversible on stopping.
There have been concerns over studies from countries of high human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
prevalence (such as sub-Saharan Africa) that have reported increased transmission and acquisition of
HIV amongst users of Depoprovera®, compared to users of other hormonal methods. However, users of
the injectable are less likely to use condoms that protect against HIV, and so at present, the expert opinion
of the WHO is that the injectable can be safely used in women living with HIV or at high risk of HIV.
Condom use in addition to the injectable should also be encouraged to protect against transmission or
acquisition of HIV.

Progestogen-releasing intrauterine system
The currently available intrauterine systems release the progestogen levonorgestrel into the uterus. There
are two LNG-IUS that are available in Europe and the USA. The 52 mg LNG-IUS (Mirena®) (Chapter 4,
Disorders of menstrual bleeding, Figure 4.3) is licensed for 5 years for contraceptive use (but if inserted
in women 45 years or older, may be used for contraception until the menopause) and the 13.5 mg LNGIUS (known as Jaydess® in Europe and Skyla® in the USA) is licensed for 3 years for contraceptive use.
The 13.5 mg LNG-IUS has a slightly narrower insertion device and it has a shorter frame, which may
make insertion easier in young or nulliparous women. The 13.5 mg LNG-IUS also has a silver band at the
proximal end, which helps distinguish it from the 52 mg LNG-IUS on ultrasound.
The LNG-IUS works by exerting a potent hormonal effect on the endometrium, which prevents
endometrial proliferation and implantation. Its progestogenic effect on thickening the cervical mucus also
impedes entry of sperm.
The LNG-IUS does not prevent ovulation. In the first few months of use, many women experience
unpredictable bleeding. Women should be advised that this usually improves with time and many women
will eventually have lighter or absent periods. Provision of quality information about side-effects in
advance of fitting a LNG-IUS is important to reduce unnecessary discontinuation rates. Reported sideeffects of the LNG-IUS include acne, breast tenderness, mood disturbance and headaches.
The most notable non-contraceptive benefit of the 52 mg LNG-IUS is that of reducing HMB (reduced
by 90% at 12 months). It is more effective than oral treatments, such as norethisterone, the COCP and
tranexamic acid, at reducing menstrual blood (see Chapter 4, Disorders of menstrual bleeding). It is also
effective for treating dysmenorrhoea, pain associated with endometriosis and adenomyosis and protecting
the endometrium against hyperplasia.

Intrauterine contraceptives (Cu-IUD, LNG-IUS)
• Last 3–10 years (or more) depending on type, woman’s age at insertion.
• Failure rate less than 1 in 100.
• Prevent fertilization.
• Impair cervical mucus.
• Inhibit implantation.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

While the 13.5 mg LNG-IUS is not licensed for use as a treatment for HMB, it does reduce blood loss
but is less likely to give amenorrhoea compared to the 52 mg LNG-IUS.

Intrauterine contraception
Intrauterine methods of contraception include the copper intrauterine device Cu-IUD and the LNG-IUS
(above).
The Cu-IUD duration of use is between 3 and 10 years, depending on the device used and age of
woman at insertion. If a woman has a Cu-IUD inserted at 40 years or above, it can be left in situ until the
menopause. For women who have a 52 mg LNG-IUS inserted at 45 years or over, the device can be left
for contraceptive purposes until the menopause.
There are a number of Cu-IUDs available and they vary in size, shape, copper content and duration of
use. Most consist of a plastic frame with copper wire wound around the stem and some may have copper
on the arms of the device. The LNG-IUS consists of an elastomere frame with a reservoir on the stem
containing levonorgestrel. With both Cu-IUD and LNG-IUS, threads protrude through the cervical canal
into the upper vagina to permit easy removal. Once inserted, the effectiveness of IUDs does not rely on
the user and so typical failure rates are much lower than the shorter-acting methods of contraception. In
addition to routine contraception the Cu-IUD can also be used for emergency contraception.
Research shows that women and health care professionals often lack accurate knowledge and often
hold negative misconceptions about IUDs. Evidence suggests that the Cu-IUD and the LNG-IUS do not
cause a delay in return to fertility or increase the risk of infertility and women should be advised of this.

Mode of action
IUDs stimulate an inflammatory reaction in the uterus. The concentration of macrophages and leucocytes,
prostaglandins and various enzymes in both uterine and tubal fluid increase significantly. It is thought that
these effects are toxic to both sperm and egg and interfere with sperm transport. If a healthy fertilized egg
reaches the uterine cavity, implantation is inhibited.

Bleeding pattern with IUD
Although women with the LNG-IUS tend to experience lighter, less painful menses, women using the CuIUD may experience more painful or heavier menses. The use of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug at
menses may help lessen the pain and blood loss. Tranexamic acid during menses may also reduce blood
loss with a CU-IUD. Alternatively a woman could switch to a LNG-IUS.
Women using an IUD should be informed that their overall risk of ectopic pregnancy is much reduced
compared with women who are using no contraception. However, if a pregnancy does occur with an IUD
in situ then the ‘relative’ risk of that pregnancy being ectopic is higher. If women become pregnant with
an IUD in situ, an ultrasound scan should be conducted to exclude ectopic pregnancy. It is generally
advisable that IUDs should be removed before 12 weeks’ gestation in view of the greater risk of
miscarriage, preterm delivery, septic abortion and chorioamnionitis if the device is left in situ. Although
there is a theroretical concern about teratogenicity if a pregnancy is exposed to the LNG-IUS, to date no
birth defects have been reported in the small number of cases exposed.

Insertion of IUD
www.medicalebookpdf.com

An IUD can be fitted at any point in the cycle provided there is no risk of pregnancy. Insertion is
associated with the following risks:
• Perforation. Uterine perforation with insertion of an IUD is rare: approximately 1 in 1,000. Factors
associated with an increased risk of perforation include relative inexperience of clinician, breastfeeding
and being less than 6 months postpartum. Usually the woman presents with ‘missing threads’ and a
history of severe pain following insertion. An ultrasound of the uterus confirms no IUD is seen in the
uterus and an abdominal X-ray shows an IUD. Laparoscopic retrieval of the device from the pelvis
(often attached to omentum) is possible in most cases, but laparotomy may rarely be required to remove
the IUD.
• Expulsion. 1 in 20 IUD devices will be expelled in the first 3 months after insertion. After this, the risk
of expulsion diminishes. Given that some expulsions are not always obvious to women, IUD users
should be advised to perform regular self checks for the presence of threads in the upper vagina to
ensure the device is still present.
• Infection. The overall risk of pelvic infection in the first 3 weeks following insertion of an IUD is low
(1 in 100). Thereafter, the risk of infection is the same as women not using contraception. In most cases,
the IUD can be left in situ and antibiotic therapy commenced. If the IUD is removed then the clinician
should provide oral emergency contraception if required (i.e. due to recent unprotected sex).
Actimomyces-like organisms (ALOs) are commonly identified on cervical smears in women with and
without an IUD. The role of ALOs in infection in IUD users is not clear. If a woman with an IUD has
ALOs but has no symptoms of infection, then the IUD can be left in situ. However, if ALOs are present
and a woman with an IUD has symptoms of infection, then the device should be removed and penicillinbased antibiotics given. In addition, women with symptoms of pelvic infection with an IUD should be
tested for sexually-transmitted infections (STIs). In order to minimize risk of pelvic infection, screening
women at risk of STIs before insertion is advised. Prophylactic antibiotics (at least to cover chlamydia)
can be given to women at high risk of infection if insertion needs to be done before results of tests are
known (e.g. Cu-IUD insertion for emergency contraception).
• ‘Missing’ threads. ‘Missing’ threads may indicate pregnancy, expulsion or perforation. However, it is
often the case that the threads are merely sitting in the cervical canal or uterus. A pregnancy test should
be performed and emergency contraception/alternative contraception provided until the IUD can be
confirmed to be in situ, either by visualization of the threads on speculum examination or an ultrasound
confirming presence of the IUD within the uterus.

Barrier contraception
Condoms
Male condoms are cheap and widely available. They protect against STIs including HIV. They are the
only reversible male method. Typical failure rates are in the region of 24% since they rely on the user to
put it on it correctly, before penetration and before every act of sex. The female condom is a lubricated
polyurethane condom that is inserted into the vagina. It also protects against STIs (Figure 6.6).

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 6.6 A: Female condom; B: male condom.

Diaphragm and cap
These are latex or non-latex devices that are inserted into the vagina to prevent passage of sperm to the
cervix (Figure 6.7). They can be inserted in advance of sex. Caps fit over the cervix whereas diaphragms
form a hammock between the post-fornix and the symphysis pubis. Caps and diaphragms are often used in
conjunction with a spermicide. Disadvantages are that women need to be taught how to insert and remove
the device and typical failure rates in the region of 18% are reported. In some women their use may be
associated with increased vaginal discharge and urinary tract infections.

Spermicides
Spermicide alone is not recommended for prevention of pregnancy as it is of low effectiveness.
Nonoxynol 9 (N-9) is a spermicidal product sold as a gel, cream, foam, sponge or pessary for use with
diaphragms or caps. Some data have suggested that frequent use of N-9 might increase the risk of HIV
transmission. It is therefore no longer recommended for women who are at high risk of HIV infection.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 6.7 A: The cap; B: correct siting of a cap.

Female sterilization
This is a permanent method of contraception that prevents sperm reaching the oocyte in the Fallopian tube.
It can be performed by (1) laparoscopy, (2) hysteroscopy or (3) laparotomy (e.g. at caesarean section).
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Laparoscopic sterilization
Laparoscopic sterilization most commonly occludes the Fallopian tube with filshie clips (Figure 6.8).
Effective contraception should be used until the next menses after the procedure, due to the risk of
pregnancy from implantation of an early fertilized egg in the same cycle as sterilization.
Women who pose a higher surgical risk due to obesity or previous abdominal surgery, for example,
may be better suited to the hysteroscopic approach.

Figure 6.8 Filshie clip.
eResource 6.1
Laparoscopic sterilization
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv6.1.php
Women who are requesting sterilization at the same time as having a caesarean section must be
counselled and give consent for this well in advance of this procedure.
Since sterilization results in permanent loss of fertility and involves a surgical procedure, it is
important that valid consent is obtained. Individuals would be deemed unable to consent if it is clear that
having been provided with appropriate support and information they cannot comprehend, retain, assess or
use the information provided to them to make a decision. In such cases, legal advice should be sought.

Advice to women considering sterilization
• Method is considered as irreversible.
• Failure rate 1:200 for laparoscopic, 1:500 for hysteroscopic (comparable to long-acting reversible
methods).
• Risks and complications (laparoscopic 1:1,000 risk of trauma to bowel, bladder or blood vessels).
• Vasectomy is safer, quicker, safer and with less morbidity.
• High proportion of women regret sterilization. Risk factors are age under 30 years, nulliparity,
recent pregnancy (birth, abortion, miscarriage) and relational issues.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• Does not protect against STIs.
• Effective contraception is required until the menstrual period following laparoscopic procedure or 3
months following hysteroscopic procedure.
• Pregnancy following female sterilization is rare but if it does occur there is an increased risk of
ectopic.
• Reversal of sterilization is a highly-skilled procedure to obtain tubal reanastomosis. It cannot be
performed after hysteroscopic sterilization, and if it is successfully conducted after laparoscopic
sterilization, then it is associated with an increased risk of ectopic pregnancy.

Hysteroscopic sterilization
This has the advantage that it can be performed as an outpatient procedure without general anaesthesia.
Microinserts (Essure®), which are expanding springs (of 2 mm diameter and 4 cm in length) made of
titanium, steel and nickel-containing Dacron fibres, are inserted into the tubal ostia via a hysteroscope
(Figure 6.9). These induce fibrosis within the cornual section of each Fallopian tube over the following 3
months. Contraception is required during the 3 months and can only be discontinued once correct
placement of the inserts are confirmed by X-ray imaging or ultrasound.

Vasectomy
This is the technique of interrupting the vas deferens to provide permanent occlusion. The so-called ‘no
scalpel’ vasectomy involves a puncture wound in the skin of the scrotum under local anaesthesia to access
and then divide and occlude the vas using cautery (Figure 6.10).
There is a small risk of a scrotal haematoma and infection with the procedure. Postvasectomy semen
analysis should be conducted at 12 weeks to confirm the absence of spermatozoa in the ejaculate.
Alternative contraception should be used until azoospermia is confirmed. The failure rate is significantly
less than female sterilization at approximately 1 in 2,000.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 6.9 Essure® hysteroscopic sterilization. (Courtesy of Justin Clark.)

Figure 6.10 Vasectomy.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Fertility awareness-based methods (FAB)
Formerly known as ‘natural family planning’, FAB rely on the signs and symptoms that reflect the
physiological changes that occur during the menstrual cycle that define the fertile period, with avoidance
of intercourse at that time. Use of FAB requires motivation and a regular menstrual cycle, and so cannot
be used for women at extremes of reproductive age. Typical failure rates are high.
The method depends on the use of one or more of the following indicators to enable avoidance of
intercourse during the fertile days.

Calendar or rhythm method
Fertile days are calculated based upon the cycle length recorded over at least six cycles. First fertile day
= shortest cycle minus 20. Last fertile day = longest cycle minus 10. For women with a 28-day cycle this
equates to abstinence for 10 days in each cycle (i.e. day 8–18).

Temperature method
This relies on the increase in basal body temperature (0.2–0.4C) produced by the rise in progesterone
following ovulation. Daily temperatures must be measured using the same route. Infection, exercise and
some medications can affect body temperature and interfere with this method.

Cervical mucus method
Mucus on toilet tissue after wiping the vulva can be examined for consistency. Midcycle ‘fertile’ mucus
due to rising oestradiol levels is clear, watery and slippery rather like raw egg white. Following
ovulation, progesterone renders it thick and opaque. Semen in the vagina may make it difficult to
recognize the mucus.

Cervical palpation
At midcycle, the cervix rises 1–2 cm and feels softer and moist.

Personal fertility monitor
This hand-held monitor analyses diposable urine dipsticks that record the presence of metabolites of
oestrogen and LH in the urine. It recognizes urinary oestrogen concentrations corresponding to the
midfollicular phase of the cycle and the preovulatory LH peak, so that the beginning and end of the fertile
phase can be identified. A red light indicates fertile phase (risk of conception) and green, infertile. Users
need to perform urine dipstick tests on early morning urine. A red light is usually shown for 6–10 days in
the cycle.

Lactational amenorrhoea
If a mother is within the first 6 months postpartum, is amenorrhoeic and is fully or nearly fully
breastfeeding, then the risk of pregnancy is about 2%. After 6 months, or if menses occur or breastfeeding
reduced, then another method of contraception must be used.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Emergency contraception
All women deserve a second chance to prevent an unintended pregnancy.
The Cu-IUD is the most effective method of emergency contraception (EC) available (failure rate 1 in
1,000) and should ideally be offered as first choice to women. When used for EC, its effect on the
endometrium is thought to prevent implantation if fertilization has occurred. The Cu-IUD can be removed
once pregnancy has been excluded or can be left in place for ongoing contraception. Since the blastocyst
will implant between 6 and 10 days after fertilization, an emergency Cu-IUD can be inserted up to 5 days
after the unprotected sex or 5 days after predicted ovulation (i.e. in a 28-day cycle, predicted ovulation
day 14 plus 5 days = insert up to day 19 for EC) in order to avoid disrupting an implanted pregnancy.
There is no evidence that the LNG-IUS is effective as EC and should therefore not be used for this
purpose.
The two oral methods of EC that are licensed for use are levonorgestrel (LNG 1.5 mg) and the
progesterone receptor modulator ulipristal acetate (30 mg). LNG appears effective up to 96 hours after
unprotected sex and ulipristal acetate for up to 120 hours. Both methods work by delaying ovulation, so
that any sperm present in the reproductive tract will have lost the ability to fertilize the oocyte once it is
eventually released. Oral EC is much less effective than the Cu-IUD for EC and is estimated to prevent
only two-thirds of pregnancies. Oral EC is much less effective than regular contraception. Women should
be encouraged to start an effective method of contraception immediately after EC, to protect against
pregnancy from further acts of intercourse.

Emergency contraception
• The most effective method of EC is an IUD (about 99% effective).
• An IUD can be inserted up to 5 days after ovulation for EC.
• Ulipristal acetate (UPA) or levonorgestrel (LNG) are available as oral methods of EC.
• UPA can be given within 120 hours of unprotected intercourse.
• LNG can be used within 96 hours of unprotected intercourse.
• Effective ongoing contraception should be started after EC.

Opportunities to provide contraception
There are important opportunities to discuss and provide effective contraception when women present to
gynaecology clinics (Table 6.7). These include presentation to a general gynaecology clinic, presentations
for EC, presentation to request an induced abortion and also antenatally or after childbirth. The
antenatal/postpartum period is a particularly important opportunity since 95% of postpartum women want
to avoid pregnancy in the next 12 months, and in women who are not fully breastfeeding, fertility may
return at 1 month postpartum. In addition, closely-spaced pregnancies increase the risks of preterm
delivery, low birthweight and small for gestational age babies. The risk of child mortality is highest for
very short birth to pregnancy intervals (<12 months). It is estimated that 30% of maternal and 10% of
child deaths worldwide could be prevented if couples space pregnancies more than 2 years apart.

Table 6.7 Opportunities to provide contraception
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Opportunity

Rationale

Gynaecology clinic

Gynaecological benefits of many hormonal methods of contraception

Emergency
contraception

Two- to threefold higher risk of unintended pregnancy if women have further
unprotected sex in same cycle
Cu-IUD can be used for EC and provide ongoing contraception

Request for induced
abortion

Most women ovulate in the month following an abortion
Women who choose to start a LARC method at the time of abortion have a
significantly reduced risk of a further abortion in the next few years

Antenatal/postpartum

50% of women resume sex by 6 weeks after childbirth
Non-breastfeeding women may ovulate at day 21

Cu-IUD, copper intrauterine device; EC, emergency contraception; LARC, long-acting reversible methods of contraception.

The future
Given the wide range of existing contraceptive methods and delivery systems (pill, patch, ring, injectable,
intrauterine) and hormonal methods with established safety, the question is often posed: Do we need new
methods of contraception?
We should remember that even in high-income countries, unintended pregnancy rates remain high.
Uptake of existing methods is limited by their acceptability to women, and for many methods
discontinuation rates are high. As science advances our understanding of reproductive physiology, women
should be able to benefit from more sophisticated methods of contraception that may be devoid of sideeffects and offer more health benefits (such as protection against STIs or breast cancer). It is also
important that male methods are developed, since they are currently limited to condoms or vasectomy.

KEY LEARNING POINTS
• In sexually active women, contraception is required until a woman reaches the menopause (or at
the age of 55 years).
• The long-acting reversible methods of contraception (LARC) are currently the most effective
methods, with typical failure rates close to perfect failure rates.
• Uptake of contraception and continuation is limited by acceptability to the user.
• If no contraceptive method is used, or a method fails, then women need easy access to EC.

Abortion
No method of contraception is perfect and so there will always be the need for safe abortion. Safe
abortion saves mothers’ lives and prevents the severe morbidity associated with unsafe abortion. Modern
www.medicalebookpdf.com

methods of inducing an abortion are safer than all common gynaecological operations, such as
sterilization and hysterectomy, and there is a lower risk of dying than during childbirth. There is evidence
that liberalization of abortion laws does NOT lead to more abortions. Restricting access to abortion
simply leads to unsafe abortion, with consequent death of the women or severe morbidity.

UK abortion law
The 1967 Abortion Act states that abortion can be performed if two registered medical practitioners
acting in good faith agree that the pregnancy should be terminated on one of the recognized legal grounds
(Table 6.8). There is actually no medical need for two doctors to be involved, and the British Medical
Association Ethics Committee have argued that the law should be changed to reflect this. Any medical
practitioner who has an objection to abortion is not required to participate in abortion services, unless the
treatment is necessary to save the life of the pregnant woman. However, a medical practitioner who
conscientiously objects to abortion should still provide advice and refer a woman promptly to another
doctor who does not hold such views.

Table 6.8 UK legal grounds for termination of pregnancy

www.medicalebookpdf.com

The 1967 Abortion Act does not apply to Northern Ireland, where abortion is only legal in exceptional
circumstances to save the life of the mother. There is continuing debate within Northern Ireland about
introducing legislative change. However, at present women in Northern Ireland need to travel to other
parts of the UK for abortion or continue an unintended pregnancy. This is also the situation for women
living in the rest of Ireland. In recent years, women living in Ireland (and other parts of the world where
abortion is not legal or access is severely restricted) have risked imprisonment and have used the Internet
to obtain medical advice from other countries and to purchase the medical abortion drugs needed to
induce an early medical abortion.

Table 6.9 Preabortion investigations
Recommended

Consider

Gestation assessment – ultrasound (or clinical assessment
if unavailable)

STI testing – chlamydia, gonorrhoea,
HIV, syphilis

Rhesus status – Anti-D required for non-immunized rhesus
negative

Full blood count – determine if anaemic

HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; STI, sexually-transmitted infection.

The vast majority (>95%) of all abortions in the UK are carried out under Ground C (Table 6.8), with
approximately 1% carried out for serious fetal abnormality (Ground E). With the exception of emergency
abortion to save the mother’s life or severe fetal abnormality, the upper legal limit for abortion is 24
weeks (23 completed weeks), which reflects fetal viability as a result of improvement in neonatal care.
Delivery of abortion services varies between countries in the UK.
The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG) guideline on the care of women
requesting an abortion recommends that services should be organized so as to minimize delay. At early
gestations, medical methods can be used with greatest efficacy, and there is less pain and bleeding and
lowest risk of complications. Most women requesting an abortion are certain of their decision and so
routine counselling for decision making is not required. However, women who are uncertain should be
offered sympathetic non-directional support in decision making. No woman should be subjected to
compulsory counselling. The RCOG has also advised on the tests that are required as part of the
preabortion work-up and of those that are not necessary but that can be offered (Table 6.9).

Methods of abortion
Neither medical nor surgical abortion is a complex procedure and both have a very low rate of
complications. Indeed, the WHO advise that in the first trimester it can be safely performed by a range of
health care providers, from a specialist obstetrician/gynaecologist to a non-specialist doctor or an
appropriately trained nurse or midwife (if country legislation permits this). Both medical and surgical
methods can be used to induce abortion throughout pregnancy. The choice of method used depends on
factors such as the gestation, pre-existing medical conditions, preference of the woman and local
availability of a skilled surgeon.

Medical abortion
www.medicalebookpdf.com

The majority of women undergoing abortion in the UK (as in other countries where medical methods are
available) choose to have abortion performed medically. This involves the combination of mifepristone
(a progesterone receptor modulator) followed by a prostaglandin analogue, misoprostol.
Progesterone is necessary to maintain uterine quiescence, so administration of mifepristone (oral)
brings about an increase in uterine contractility. It also sensitizes the uterus to exogenous prostaglandins.
This permits lower doses of misoprostol to be used to bring about expulsion. The effect of mifepristone is
maximal at 48 hours so that if misoprostol is administered at an interval of 24–48 hours later, then there is
an increase in cramping pain, bleeding and expulsion of the fetus through the slightly dilated cervix. In the
first 9 weeks of pregnancy, women can safely self-administer these medications at home (if the country
legislation permits) and expel the pregnancy at home. Simple oral analgesia (e.g. ibuprofen,
dihydrocodeine) is usually sufficient to provide pain relief. Women can be advised that at 9 weeks’
gestation they will bleed for on average 2 weeks following the medical abortion.
After 9 weeks’ gestation, the same combination of mifepristone and misoprostol is used, except that
the regimen requires repeated doses of misoprostol to be administered every 3 hours until expulsion
occurs. After 9 weeks’ gestation, the discomfort, increased bleeding and passage of a larger fetus mean
that women are managed in a clinical setting. In the second trimester, the average induction to abortion
time (from first dose of misoprostol to expulsion) is 7 hours.
After 21 completed weeks (i.e. 21 weeks and 6 days) the RCOG recommends that for women
undergoing medical abortion, feticide should be used to eliminate the possibility of the aborted fetus
displaying any signs of life. This is usually conducted by intracardiac injection of potassium chloride or
an intrafetal or intramniotic injection of digoxin. The neural pathways necessary to experience pain are
not fully developed in the fetus until after 24 weeks.

Surgical methods
Vacuum aspiration
Vacuum aspiration is the method that should be used to conduct a surgical termination of pregnancy up to
14 weeks. The procedure involves gently dilating the cervix with graduated dilators (usually to the size in
mm that the uterus is in weeks’ gestation) and then evacuating the cavity with gentle suction. This usually
takes less than 10 minutes to perform. Sharp curettage should never be performed (increased risk of
perforation and intrauterine adhesions). Vacuum aspiration can be performed either using a manual
handheld aspirator (manual vacuum aspiration, MVA) or using electrical vacuum aspiration (EVA). There
is little to choose between MVA and EVA. The MVA may be more practical and portable for use in the
outpatient setting. The EVA gives a more constant suction.
Surgical termination can be performed under either local or general anaesthesia. Local anaesthesia in
the first trimester is preferred as it minimizes any small risk of anaesthestic drugs. It is important to
consider pretreatment of the cervix with misoprostol for all women undergoing surgical abortion. The use
of misoprostol has been shown to bring about cervical dilation and so makes instrumental cervical easier
and minimizes the risk of incomplete abortion. As a minimum, pretreatment should always be used after
12 weeks’ gestation or in women in whom cervical dilation may be anticipated to be more difficult (e.g.
nulliparous, adolescent, previous cervical surgery). The optimal regimen for cervical pretreatment is 400
µg misoprostol given sublingually 1 hour prior to the surgical procedure.
It is recommended that prophylactic antibiotics should be given (periabortal) with surgical abortion,
since this has been shown to significantly reduce the risk of postabortal infection following this
www.medicalebookpdf.com

procedure. Prophylactic antibiotics are not considered necessary following medical abortion, since the
overall incidence of postabortal infection is lower after medical than after surgical abortion.

Dilation and evacuation
After 14 weeks, the surgical technique of choice is dilation and evacuation. In skilled hands, this
procedure has a low complication rate and is highly acceptable to women. It is widely used in North
America, but is less common in Europe. It is necessary to achieve good cervical dilation before the
procedure (up to 20 mm) in order to remove larger fetal parts. This is achieved using one or a
combination of either osmotic dilators (hygroscopic sticks placed in the cervix several hours
preprocedure that absorb fluid from surrounding tissues, causing them to swell and bring about cervical
dilation), or misoprostol (vaginal or sublingual) or mifepristone (oral). At surgery, the cervix is then
further dilated using graduated dilators and the contents of the uterus removed by a combination of
aspiration and extraction of fetal tissue using appropriate instruments; ultrasound is performed to confirm
complete evacuation.

Sequelae of abortion
Both medical and surgical abortion are safe with a low incidence of complications. Complications when
they do occur include failure to end the pregnancy (ongoing pregnancy), incomplete abortion requiring
evacuation, infection and haemorrhage. In the absence of a serious complication (such as operative
complication or severe infection), there is no impact on future reductive potential. There is no association
with future infertility or ectopic pregnancy. While several studies have suggested an increased risk of
preterm delivery following abortion, findings of recent studies have suggested that modern medical and
surgical methods of inducing abortion are not associated with this risk.
There is no association with breast cancer. There is no adverse effect on mental health, although
women with an existing history of mental health are at increased risk of exacerbation postabortion, as they
are postpartum. Women for whom the pregnancy was originally intended, women who are unsupported,
women who are ambivalent about the decision to terminate or who belong to a group that feels that
abortion is morally wrong, are at higher risk of ongoing distress or regret following the procedure.
Women should be given information on how to seek help under such circumstances.

Follow-up after abortion
There is no medical need for a follow-up after an uncomplicated abortion. Rather, women should be
provided with good verbal and written advice about signs and symptoms that might indicate the need to
seek medical attention, together with access to a 24-hour emergency care. Women should also be
provided with their chosen method of ongoing contraception at the time of the abortion procedure. For
women who have had an early medical abortion at home, there should be an effective method of
confirming success of the abortion. This could be a scheduled ultrasound (to exclude ongoing pregnancy)
or a self-performed urine pregnancy test at home in combination with/without a telephone call from the
provider to determine the result of the pregnancy test and confirm that the woman has had expected
duration of bleeding and that symptoms of pregnancy have disappeared.

Postabortal contraception
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Most women ovulate in the first month after the abortion, and more than one-half of women will have
resumed sex by 2 weeks postabortion. Effective contraception should therefore be commenced
immediately if women want to avoid another unintended pregnancy.
There is evidence that women who choose to use the most effective LARC postabortion (and start
these immediately after the abortion) have a significantly reduced risk of having a subsequent unintended
pregnancy, compared to women choosing other methods. There has been much effort in recent years in
ensuring abortion services provide high-quality information about contraception and are able to provide
all methods at the time of discharge following the procedure (including provision of LARC). All methods
(including hormonal and intrauterine) can be safely commenced at the time of abortion. Intrauterine
methods can be inserted at the time of surgical abortion, and following expulsion of the fetus at medical
abortion.

Further reading
Faculty of Sexual and Reproductive Healthcare, Clinical Effectiveness Unit Guideline (2015).
Problematic bleeding with hormonal contraception. www.fsrh.org.
Trussell J (2014). Contraceptive efficacy. Glob Libr Womens Med [last accessed 06.05.14], ISSN:
1756-2228, http://dx.doi.org/10.3843/GLOWM10375. This chapter was last updated,
http://www.glowm.com/section_view/item/374; 2014.
World Health Organization (2015). Medical Eligibility Criteria for Contraceptive Use, 5th edn.
Geneva: WHO; www.WHO.org.

Self assessment
CASE HISTORY
A 44-year-old woman requests sterilization as she does not want any more children. She has three
children. Her partner will not consider a vasectomy. She has regular but heavy menses. She is
currently using no method of contraception. She smokes and suffers from migraine.
A What are the key points to cover in the counselling on sterilization?
B What alternative methods of contraception might be appropriate for this woman?
C What methods of contraception is she not medically eligible for?
ANSWERS
A Important points to cover are that sterilization should be considered as irreversible, that it has a
failure rate of approx 1:200 and that it is a surgical procedure with associated risks and
complications. It is no more effective than long-acting reversible methods. Also, pregnancy
following female sterilization is rare but if it does occur there is an increased risk of ectopic, and
reversal of sterilization is a highly-skilled procedure to obtain tubal reanastomosis. It cannot be
www.medicalebookpdf.com

performed after hysteroscopic sterilization and if it is successfully conducted after laparoscopic
sterilization, then it is associated with an increased risk of ectopic pregnancy.
B The LNG-IUS provides comparable contraceptive effectiveness, and also has the noncontraceptive benefit of reduced menstrual blood loss. Other progestogen-only methods such as
POP or implant may also be appropriate, but irregular bleeding is common and POP has higher
typical failure rates. The injectable could also be considered.
C CHCis contraindicated since the woman is a smoker who is over 35 years and also has migraine.
The Cu-IUD is not ideal since this may exacerbate the existing heavy menses.

EMQ
Characteristics of contraceptive methods
A UPA.
B Progestogen-only injectable.
C COCP.
D Cu-IUD.
E LNG-IUS.
F Progestogen-only implant.
G Lactational amenorrhoea.
H Diaphragm.
For each description below choose the SINGLE most appropriate answer from the above list of
options. Each option may be used once, more than once or not at all.
1 Which is the most effective emergency contraceptive available?
2 Can delay return to fertility on discontinuation.
3 Is associated with typical failure rates of 12 per 100 in the first 12 months.
4 Main mode of action is prevention of fertilization.
ANSWERS
1D Cu-IUD. But must be used within 5 days of predicted ovulation.
2B Progestogen-only injectable. Irregular bleeding and involution can persist for several months.
3C COCP. This figure should be known as the COCP is frequently prescribed and patients need to
know the risk of failure.
4D Cu-IUD. Through the effect of spermicide as well as thickened cervical mucus.

SBA QUESTIONS

www.medicalebookpdf.com

1 A 19-year-old woman who previously had a medical abortion attends a clinic requesting
contraception. She is overweight and has acne but has no other medical history of note. Her mother
had a deep vein thrombosis (DVT) after childbirth.
Which of the following is not a suitable method for her? Choose the single best answer.
A Depoprovera.
B POP.
C CHC patch.
D LNG-IUS.
E Progestogen-only implant.
ANSWER
C The family history of DVT in a first-degree relative is a contraindication to all CHC methods.
2 A 29-year-old female presents requesting contraception. She is known to have polycystic ovary
syndrome and struggles with acne and hirsutism. She would like to have a baby in 12 months time.
She has no other medical conditions and is fit and healthy.
What would be the best contraceptive option for her? Choose the single best answer.
A IUD.
B Progestogen-only implant.
C COCP.
D Progestogen-only injectable.
E IUS.
ANSWER
C COCP will provide non-contraceptive benefit for acne and hirsutism because it causes an increase
in sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG), which reduces free testosterone. There is no delay of
return to fertility.
The other choices would provide good contraception but no improvement in PCOS symptoms.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

www.medicalebookpdf.com

CHAPTER 7

Subfertility
STUART LAVERY

Introduction
Natural conception
Causes of subfertility
History and examination
Investigations
Management
Fertility preservation
Further reading
Self assessment

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
• Understand the definition and causes of subfertility.
• Describe the concept of ovarian reserve.
• Understand the history, examination and investigations relevant to subfertility.
• Understand the provision and regulation of fertility treatment.
• Explain the processes and procedures involved in assisted reproductive treatment (ART).
• Understand the outcomes and success rates of ART.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Introduction
A delay in conception is one of the commonest reasons that a woman will consult her doctor. There is no
one universal definition of subfertility, but the commonest accepted definition is a failure to conceive after
12 months of regular unprotected intercourse. The incidence of subfertility is thought to affect about one in
seven heterosexual couples. There has been a small increase in the prevalence of reported infertility, and
a larger number of couples accessing treatment services over the last 10 years in the UK. This may be
related to an increased acceptance of fertility treatments and a reduction in couples resigning themselves
to childlessness. The diagnosis of subfertility in a couple may be primary in couples that have never
conceived together, or secondary in couples that have previously conceived together (although either
partner may have conceived in a different relationship, which requires further elucidation). The approach
to fertility investigation and management should always be couple-centred. Specialist teams should be
available to offer evidence-based advice and treatment to couples, supported by counselling services and
accurate information.

Natural conception
A healthy couple having frequent intercourse have about an 18–20% chance of conceiving in a single
menstrual cycle. As a species this makes us relatively infertile. There is of course a cumulative increase
in pregnancy rates over time as couples try for conception. Within 6 months 70% of couples will have
conceived, after 12 months 80% and after 24 months 90% of couples will achieve a pregnancy (Figure
7.1). The most important factor affecting fertility is female age, which is related to a decline in the quality
and quantity of eggs. Female fertility tends to fall sharply over the age of 36, with a further dip after the
age of 40. However, there is a considerable variation and biological age (or ovarian reserve) does not
always precisely correlate with chronological age. Male age is also an important factor; semen quality
tends to fall in men over the age of 50, while frequency of intercourse tends to fall in men over the age of
40.
Both frequency and timing of sexual intercourse impact strongly on the chance of conceiving naturally.
Couples having intercourse three times a week are three times more likely to conceive than couples
having intercourse once a week. Maximum ‘efficiency’ is probably intercourse at least every alternate
day. There should, however, be awareness among physicians and patients of the added stress and anxiety
that ‘overmedicalizing’ this advice can bring to couples. Increased frequency of intercourse should be
encouraged in the periovulatory period. Eggs are thought to be fertilizable for about 12–24 hours
postovulation, while sperm can survive in the female reproductive tract for up to 72 hours. Ovulation
usually occurs about 14 days prior to menstruation, with the luteal phase being relatively stable at this
length. The ‘fertile window’ for women will, therefore, be different depending on the average length of
their menstrual cycle (e.g. for a woman with a 28-day menstrual cycle, her optimal fertile window will be
between days 12 and 15).
External factors may influence the chance of conception. There is now strong evidence that smoking
can decrease the quality and quantity of eggs and sperm. The role of alcohol and caffeine remains
controversial, and there is no compelling evidence to totally abstain from these while trying to conceive,
but moderation is probably sensible. Body mass index (BMI) exerts a strong influence on fertility, with
www.medicalebookpdf.com

male and female BMI at both the high and low extremes associated with a reduced chance of conceiving.
However, there is little evidence for so-called fertility diets to improve natural fertility. Stress can have a
direct influence on the hypothalamic–pituitary–ovarian (HPO) axis, interfering with regular ovulation, and
may indirectly reduce conception by reducing libido and frequency of intercourse.

Figure 7.1 The natural conception rate over a 3-year period.
All women trying to conceive should commence taking folic acid to reduce fetal neural tube defects.

Causes of subfertility
The main causes of subfertility will vary in different countries. In the UK around 30% of subfertility is
caused by male factor, 30% female factor, 25% unexplained and 15% both male and female or other
causes. This can be further broken down into causes (some of which are male, some female) as shown in
Figure 7.2.

Female subfertility
Ovulatory disorders, tubal damage and uterine disorders (e.g. fibroids) are the most common causes with
endometrial pathology, specific gamete or embryo defects and endometriosis contributory. Cigarette
smoking reduces fertility. General medical conditions such as diabetes, epilepsy, thyroid disorders and
bowel disease can also reduce the chance of conception. Decreased ovarian reserve and age are major
factors in reduced female fertility.

Ovulatory disorders
The commonest cause of problems with ovulation is polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) (see Chapter 3,
Hormonal control of the menstrual cycle and hormonal disorders). Women with PCOS who suffer from
oligomenorrhoea due to anovolution may require treatment. However, the hormonal treatments taken by
women to regulate their periods or help hirsutism may be incompatible with getting pregnant (e.g. the
combined oral contraceptive pill).
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Hypothalamic disorders (e.g. hypothalamic hypogonadism), pituitary disease (e.g.
hyperprolactinaemia) and endocrine abnormalities (thyroid disease) are less common causes due to
anovulation.

Figure 7.2 Causes of subfertility.

Tubal problems
Tubal blockage is usually associated with inflammatory processes in the pelvis such as pelvic
inflammatory disease (PID) or endometriosis. Chlamydial infections in particular can produce significant
degrees of tubal damage, often resulting in a hydrosalpinx – a blocked Fallopian tube, often with a
thickened wall, flattened epithelial mucosa and peritubal adhesions.
Previous pelvic or abdominal surgery can result in postoperative scar tissue or adhesions that can also
compromise tubal patency and function. The Fallopian tube is not a passive conduit – normal tubal
function requires both patency and a healthy anatomy and physiology for gamete and embryo transport.
eResource 7.1
Tubal blockage
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv7.1.php

Uterine problems
Uterine factors such as fibroids can interfere with fertility, but their impact depends on their size and
location. There is good evidence that submucosal fibroids have a direct impact on embryo implantation
and intramural fibroids may reduce fertility if they are large (>5 cm). Subserosal fibroids have very little
impact if present in isolation. Endometrial polyps can reduce the chance of implantation, although this
tends not to be absolute. Endometrial scarring (Asherman’s syndrome) from surgery or infection can be
associated with lighter periods and a significantly reduced chance of conception.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Male factor
Compromised sperm number or quality is an important contributor to subfertility. There is some evidence
that sperm counts are falling, and there are various theories that try to explain this, including
environmental and dietary issues. Spermatogonial cells that produce the sperm can be damaged by
inflammation (orchitis) or the epididymis that stores mature sperm can also be damaged. Certain
iatrogenic influences such as pelvic radiotherapy or surgery for undescended or torted testes can reduce
sperm production or damage or block the male reproductive tract. Medical conditions such as diabetes
and certain occupations involving contact with chemicals or radiation are associated with male factor
subfertility. Occasionally, sperm production may be normal but there are erectile difficulties or problems
with ejaculation.
Genetic causes of male factor infertility include aneuploidy of sex chromosomes (Klinefelter XXY
most commonly) or structural abnormalities of the autosomes, such as inversions, deletions or balanced
translocations. Microdeletions of the azoospermic factor (AZF) regions of the Y chromosome are
associated with low sperm counts and motility.
eResource 7.2
Normal and abnormal sperm
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv7.2.php

Table 7.1 Key points to cover in history and examination of patients presenting with
subfertility

www.medicalebookpdf.com

History and examination
A thorough and detailed history must be taken from patients presenting with subfertility. As this is a
couple-centred issue it is advisable for both partners to be present at the consultation. Key features are
presented in Table 7.1. In many clinics a template is employed to ensure all these features are covered.

Investigations
It is usually preferable to diagnose a cause of subfertility so that an appropriate treatment can be targeted
to a specific pathology. However, even with a detailed series of investigations, a significant delay in
conception for a significant number of couples will remain unexplained. There is some debate as to when
investigations should be started; considerations such as age and the level of anxiety in the couple are
important. Most authorities suggest that investigations are sensible in a couple that have not conceived
after 1 year of regular unprotected intercourse.
Investigations can be justifiably commenced earlier if the couple have a history of predisposing
factors such as amenorrhoea, oligomenorrhoea, PID, women with low ovarian reserve or known male
factor subfertility.

Female investigations
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Blood hormone profile. In a woman with a regular menstrual cycle this should include early follicular
phase follicular-stimulating hormone (FSH), oestradiol and luteinizing hormone (LH). Anti-Müllerian
hormone (AMH) (see below) is proving particularly helpful in the assessment of ovarian reserve and is
independent of the menstrual cycle, which is practical. A midluteal progesterone measurement should be
taken to confirm ovulation. In women with an irregular menstrual cycle, thyroid function, prolactin and
testosterone can also prove useful.
Chlamydia testing should be offered prior to any uterine instrumentation. If ART is to be offered, viral
screening for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and hepatitis B and C should be offered.
Transvaginal ultrasound (TVUSS) should be performed where possible. This provides an accurate
assessment of pelvic anatomy, including uterine size and shape, the presence of any fibroids, ovarian size,
position and morphology, with antral follicle count (AFC) an important parameter of ovarian reserve.
Pathology such as hydrosalpinges and endometriotic cysts can be detected, and access to the ovaries for
ART can be assessed. Tubal potency testing may be necessary as described below.

Measurement of ovarian reserve
• Female reproductive potential is directly proportionate to the remaining number of oocytes in the
ovaries, which is called ovarian reserve.
• Ovarian reserve declines after the age of 35 in an average healthy woman, or at an earlier age due to
genetic predisposition, surgery or following exposure to toxins, such as chemotherapy.
• The ovarian reserve can help to predict the response to ovarian stimulation in ART.
• The AFC seen on TVUSS is a good indicator of ovarian reserve (<4 predicting low response, >16
high response).
• AMH is produced in the granulosa cells of ovarian follicles and does not change in response to
gonadotrophins during the menstrual cycle. As a result, it can be measured and compared from any
point in the cycle and, at present, is the most successful biochemical marker.
• Neither AMH nor AFC are perfect indicators and most clinics utilize both to assess ovarian reserve.

Tubal assessment
Tubal patency and an assessment of the uterine cavity are traditionally investigated by
hysterosalpingography (HSG) using X-ray, hysterocontrast synography (HyCoSy) using ultrasound or,
more recently, 3D hysterocontrast synography (Figure 7.3). There is some evidence that patients deemed
at high risk of pelvic pathology could benefit from a more invasive laparoscopy and hysteroscopy as a
dual diagnostic and potentially therapeutic procedure. It is crucial to remember that tubal patency is not
equivalent to tubal function. Currently, there is as yet no effective test to check for tubal function.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 7.3 A: Hysterosalpingogram (HSG) showing normal patency of the Fallopian tubes; B: pictorial
illustration of a normal HSG; C: abnormal HSG with pocketed areas suggesting blocked tubes.

Male investigations
The only routine investigation on the male side is a semen fluid analysis (SFA). Most centres recommend
between a 2- and 4-day abstinence from ejaculation before providing the semen sample. The new WHO
criteria (2010) for semen analysis are presented in Table 7.2. These are not average or median
measurements, but represent lower reference limits (5th centile). If the initial SFA is abnormal it should
be repeated 3 months later, to allow adequate time for spermatogenesis, because occasionally an
abnormal SFA will result from insults such as viral infections.
Some clinics will also assess total motile count, the presence of round cells or leucocytes to assess for
inflammation and the presence of sperm antibodies. For men with a very low sperm count or
azoospermia, a hormone profile including FSH, LH and testosterone should be performed. This may have
www.medicalebookpdf.com

later importance in male health as testicular failure may be associated with symptomatic low testosterone.
We also recommend a karyotype and a cystic fibrosis screen.
Microdeletions of the AZFa and AZFb regions of the Y chromosome are not tested for routinely,
because they are not ameliorable to treatment. However, they carry a poor prognosis for surgical sperm
retrieval procedures and may be tested for in this context in the presence of azoospermia.

Table 7.2 World Health Organization parameters for semen analysis – 5th centile

Less evidence-based tests include measuring deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) fragmentation levels in the
sperm.

Management
The management of the couple’s subfertility should be evidence based and relies on an accurate
diagnostic evaluation of the history, clinical examination and investigations. Management may be
expectant, medical, surgical or a combination of these. Fertility treatment should be individualized to
optimize the treatment result (Table 7.3).

Ovulation induction
For patients with PCOS ovulatory problems, ovulation induction (OI) is usually the first line of
management so long as there is tubal patency and normal semen analysis. The most common ovulation
induction agent used is the antioestrogen clomiphene citrate. Clomiphene binds to oestrogen receptors in
the hypothalamus and pituitary. This blocks the normal feedback loops of oestrogen and results in a surge
of gonadotrophin release, stimulating the ovary to recruit more follicles for maturation. Approximately
70% of women on clomiphene will ovulate and approximately one-half of these will be pregnant within 6
months of trying. There is a risk of multiple pregnancies (12%) and therefore women on clomiphene
should be monitored by ultrasound scans to track the growth of their follicles, identify the time of
ovulation and reduce the risk of multiple pregnancy. In clomiphene-resistant women, alternative strategies
include augmentation with metformin, use of aromatase inhibitors (although not licensed for this
indication in some countries) and injectable gonadotrophins. OI can also be induced by laparoscopic
www.medicalebookpdf.com

ovarian drilling (LOD) in PCOS. For unknown reasons, passing electrical energy through polycystic
ovaries can result in the induction of ovulation. However, as LOD is a surgical procedure with the
attached risks associated with surgery and anaesthesia, it is only appropriate to offer such treatment to
women who have not responded to clomiphene treatment.
In women with anovulation of hypothalamic origin, OI using injectable gonadotrophins is more
effective.

Table 7.3 Summary of the medical and surgical management of subfertility

Surgery
Surgery to treat subfertility can be helpful in a variety of different scenarios. Most fertility surgery is
currently performed using minimal access techniques such as laparoscopy of hysteroscopy. Investigation
www.medicalebookpdf.com

of infertility and tubal potency testing by minimal access surgery (MAS) is undertaken if the patient is
symptomatic or if specific therapeutic treatment is planned. There is good evidence that laparoscopic
ablation of endometriosis can help improve natural conception rates. Often surgery may be used as an
adjunct to ART. For example, the surgical disconnection from the uterus or removal of hydrosalpinges is
associated with a significant improvement in in-vitro fertilization (IVF) success rates (Figure 7.4). Some
practitioners still recommend a more traditional open laparotomy approach for the use of myomectomy
for very large uterine fibroids or for the use of tubal microsurgery in reversal of sterilization, proximal or
distal tubal microsurgery. Submucosal fibroids, endometrial polyps, Asherman syndrome and some
congenital uterine anomalies, such as a septum, are usually managed hysteroscopically.

Intrauterine insemination
Intrauterine insemination (IUI) is performed by introducing a small sample of prepared sperm into the
uterine cavity with a fine uterine catheter. IUI may be helpful in cases of mild endometriosis, mild male
factor subfertility, in couples who do not have intercourse or in single women or same sex couples using
donor sperm. The success rate of this procedure ranges between 10% and 20% per treatment cycle. This
process may be preceded by several days of mild stimulation with subcutaneous injections daily of
exogenous FSH, with the aim of stimulating the ovaries to produce 2–3 mature follicles (this is termed
stimulated IUI). Follicular tracking with ultrasound is essential to avoid over- or understimulation.
Triggering of ovulation (and therefore the timing of the insemination) is achieved with a subcutaneous
injection of human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG). This mimics the endogenous LH surge, due to crossover of the alpha-subunits of the two hormones.

Figure 7.4 A: Photograph of the normal fimbrial end of Fallopian tube; B: photograph of right
hydrosalpinx.

In-vitro fertilization
IVF was originally designed for couples with tubal factor subfertility. Steptoe and Edwards performed the
first successful case in 1978. There are now over 5 million babies worldwide as a result of IVF. IVF is
now used for almost all cases of subfertility including tubal disease, endometriosis, failed ovulation
induction, failed IUI or where donor eggs are needed.
Originally, IVF was performed in the natural menstrual cycle, but the use of gonadotrophin-controlled
ovarian stimulation made IVF a much more efficient process. ART in the UK is regulated by the Human
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Fertilisation and Embryo Authority (HFEA), who provide guidelines and statistics for patients and
clinicians, as well as inspecting clinics to ensure adherence to mutually agreed quality standards. IVF can
be performed with many different protocols and medications, but the principal steps of IVF are shown in
Figure 7.5 and are as follows.

Pituitary down-regulation
In the most commonly used IVF cycle the pituitary gland is down-regulated to prevent endogenous LH
surges and premature ovulation. A gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonist is used to block the
FSH and LF release from the pituitary. Newer approaches involving the use of GnRH antagonists can
shorten treatment time and reduce the incidence of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome.

Controlled ovarian stimulation
This is achieved using daily subcutaneous doses of gonadotrophin medications, which cause multiple
follicle recruitment. Close monitoring with TVUSS predicts the number of follicles and the timing of the
egg collection. Ideally, around 15 follicles are recruited. Blood levels may be taken to measure oestradiol
levels, and are used by some to measure ovarian response to stimulation. Ultrasound measurement of
endometrial thickness is also performed.

Inhibition of premature ovulation
Feedback from rising oestradiol associated with follicular development should lead to an LH surge from
the pituitary, resulting in final oocyte maturation and ovulation. In IVF this is blocked to allow scheduling
of egg collection. This is traditionally done by the administration of GnRH agonists, or with a newer
shorter GnRH antagonist protocol.

hCG trigger
hCG is used as a surrogate for the endogenous LH surge. It causes final maturation of the egg and allows
scheduling of the egg collection procedure.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 7.5 Pictorial in-vitro fertilization (IVF) cycle. (ICSI, intracytoplasmic sperm injection.)

Egg collection
This procedure is usually performed about 37 hours post hCG trigger. Under anaesthesia a needle is
inserted into the ovaries under TVUSS control, and follicular fluid is aspirated from each follicle that
contains an oocyte, which is collected by the embryologist into the laboratory.
eResource 7.3
Egg collection using TVUSS
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv7.3.php

Fertilization
Fertilization is performed using prepared sperm. Conventional IVF fertilization involves the insemination
of around 100,000 sperm in a petri-dish with an egg. In cases of poor sperm parameters or in cases of
previous poor fertilization, individual sperm can be isolated and directly injected into the cytoplasm of
the oocyte (intracytoplasmic sperm injection, ICSI) (Figure 7.6). Fertilization is checked the next morning
and is usually in the region of 60% for IVF and 70% for ICSI.

Embryo culture
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Embryos are incubated under strict conditions of temperature, pH, humidity and oxygen concentration.
They may be transferred back into the uterus after 2, 3 or 5 days of development. Embryos reaching the
blastocyst stage on day 5 of development usually exhibit the best chance of implantation. A variety of
different protocols are available for embryo selection, including a morphological and a morpho-kinetic
assessment.

Figure 7.6 Intracytoplasmic sperm injection.

Embryo transfer
Embryos are transferred into the uterus using a soft plastic catheter. The choice of how many embryos to
transfer is the decision of the couple following expert medical and embryological advice; this may be
constrained by local regulatory or funding parameters. Embryo transfer is usually performed under
transabdominal ultrasound control to ensure correct placement of the embryos. In the UK and Europe there
are recommendations regarding the transfer of single embryos to reduce the incidence of multiple
pregnancies and their associated risks.
eResource 7.4
TVUSS-guided embryo transfer
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv7.4.php

Embryo cryopreservation
Spare embryos of good quality may be cryopreserved for future use. Vitrification techniques now allow
for success rates from frozen embryos to approximate success rates in fresh treatment cycles. This makes
the transfer of fresh single embryos with the vitrification of spare embryos more appealing to couples.

Luteal phase support
The use of gonadotrophin agonists or antagonists to prevent a premature LH surge will lead to a reduction
in the ability of the corpus luteum to produce progesterone. Patients are therefore supplemented with
progesterone following the egg collection. There is no consensus on the ideal dose, route or duration of
progesterone supplementation. A pregnancy test is performed around 14 days after embryo transfer.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

ART success rates
IVF success rates are exquisitely sensitive to female age. In young patients under the age of 35 success
rates can be as high as 40–45% from a single cycle, while in women over the age of 40 they will fall
below 15%. Undergoing IVF does not preclude the patient from the normal complications of pregnancy,
such as miscarriage or ectopic pregnancies. The most significant risk of IVF treatment is ovarian
hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS), occurring in 1–3% of cases. Patients with severe OHSS present with
ascites, enlarged multifollicular ovaries, pulmonary oedema and coagulopathy. These patients need to be
admitted to hospital and managed under strict protocols under the care of specialist teams. The use of
low-dose stimulation, ultrasound monitoring, GnRH antagonist protocols, GnRH agonist triggers and a
more liberal freezing policy have significantly reduced the incidence of this very serious condition.

Donor gametes
Donor sperm can be used to treat patients where the male partner is azoospermic or in the case of single
women or female same sex couples. Both IUI and IVF treatments are possible. Donor eggs may be used if
the female has undergone early menopause or if IVF treatments have been unsuccessful and associated
with a reduced ovarian reserve and low egg number and quality. Gamete donation requires careful and
thorough counselling and most countries have legislation to regulate its use.

Surgical sperm retrieval
Where the sperm quality or quantity is low but sperm are present, ICSI is required to help achieve a
pregnancy. However, in the absence of naturally ejaculated sperm (termed azoospermia – which may
relate to blockage of the vas deferens or testicular problems), patients may undergo surgical sperm
retrieval (SSR). SSR can be performed under sedation or general anaesthesia. A fine needle is inserted
into the epididymis or the testicular tissue to obtain sperm or testicular tissue with sperm, respectively.
The retrieved sperm can then be cryopreserved or injected into the oocyte as part of a fresh IVF/ICSI
cycle.

Preimplantation genetic diagnosis
Couples who carry a genetic disease (but who are fertile) may choose to use IVF and preimplantation
genetic diagnosis (PGD) to avoid an affected pregnancy. These patients may previously have had affected
children or terminations for an affected fetus. IVF will create multiple embryos. These embryos can then
be genetically tested for the relevant disease, by the removal of several cells at the blastocyst stage that
are tested and taken to reflect the genotype of the remaining embryo. Only embryos free of the disease are
transferred into the uterus. PGD has now been used worldwide for most monogenic diseases, as well as
for translocations. The use of PGD for social sex selection is illegal in the UK but available
controversially in many other countries.
There is a large attrition rate in PGD treatment from the number of eggs to embryos to unaffected
embryos available for transfer. In some cycles none of the embryos will be unaffected and no embryo
transfer will result. Success rates therefore reflect this, and vary according to the inheritance pattern of
the disorder.
eResource 7.5
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Embryo biopsy for PGD
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv7.5.php
Similar genetic analysis of embryos has been used to detect chromosomal aneuploidy in embryos in
patients having IVF treatment, in an attempt to select the embryos with the greatest implantation potential
and reduce the time to a pregnancy. This remains controversial and subject to research trials.

Fertility preservation
Patients may face treatments such as chemotherapy, radiotherapy or surgery that could significantly
damage their gonads and reduce their reproductive potential. For many years men have been able to
‘bank’ sperm ahead of these treatments. Couples can now undergo rapid IVF procedures and cryopreserve
embryos for use later on when health is regained.

KEY LEARNING POINTS
• A careful history, appropriate clinical examination, correct investigation and advice on evidencebased treatments underpin successful fertility treatment. The approach should always be couplecentred with counselling when necessary.
• The couple should be given information on the chances of conceiving naturally and how to optimize
this. This should include the impact of advancing age and advice on lifestyle issues relating to diet,
smoking, weight and alcohol consumption.
• Ovarian reserve decreases significantly with age, with the gradient increasing over the age of 36
and again at 40.
• Fertility treatment is a combination of expectant, surgical and medical treatments that are
complementary to each other.
• Treatments should be tailored to an individual couple’s needs, and can include ovulation induction,
surgery, IUI and IVF.
• Fertility preservation and PGD are new and effective treatment options for selected patient groups.

Recent advances in vitrification have now also allowed young, healthy, single women to go through
IVF and freeze their oocytes.
There is very promising evidence, and some successful reports of live births, on the role of
laparoscopic ovarian cortex collection and cryopreservation. Tissue could be auto-transplanted back into
the patient’s pelvis once health is regained.

Further reading
Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority. www.hfea.gov.uk.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

National Institute for Clinical Excellence. Fertility assessment and treatment for people with fertility
problems. Clinical guidelines (CG11) https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg156.
Van Voorlis BJ (2007). Clinical practice. In vitro fertilisation. New Engl J Med 356:379–86.

Self assessment
CLINICAL HISTORY
A 36-year-old woman, Jane, and her 39-year-old partner, David, have come to the fertility clinic
after trying for a baby for 3 years. The referral letter notes that Jane has irregular periods and David
had a hernia repair as a child. Neither have any children.
A What important parts of the history must you ask?
B What investigations will you request?
C What treatment will they need?
ANSWERS
A In the fertility clinic a general gynaecological history must first be obtained, and then more specific
questions will follow. You must determine how long exactly they have been having unprotected
intercourse and what ‘irregular periods’ means by enquiring about frequency of bleeds, length of
bleeds, any other abnormal uterine bleeding. Irregular periods must prompt questions about
hirsutism, weight and acne, as these will support the diagnosis of PCOS, a common cause of
anovulation. You must ask for how long the irregular bleeds have happened, as you may be mindful
of a diagnosis of decreasing ovarian reserve, a cause that may be associated with hot sweats. Do
not forget to ask about smear tests and STIs. Confirm that Jane has never been pregnant before,
including miscarriages and ectopic pregnancies. Also check that none of David’s previous
partners have become pregnant.
Ask about frequency of intercourse and any problems with intercourse, because fertility
problems are strongly associated with psychosexual problems, both female and male. On the male
side you need to ask more about the hernia repair: was it one side or both, and at what age?
You find that Jane has always had irregular periods except when she was on the OCP. She
usually has a period every 2–3 months and they vary from very heavy to normal. She has struggled
with androgenic symptoms, except when on the OCP. She manages to keep her weight down with
difficulty, and keeps her BMI below 30 with a combination of diet and exercise.
David had a unilateral uncomplicated hernia repair aged 4 years. He had a sperm count
measured about 2 years ago by the GP, which was ‘borderline’, so they felt it was worth
continuing to try naturally for a while. Intercourse is every few days; they no longer try to work
out when ovulation has occurred.
B The investigations required are a hormone profile for Jane, a TVUSS to look for PCOS and other
abnormalities and SFA for David. Tubal testing at this point is not indicated.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

On review Jane has a hormone profile indicating PCOS, with LH slightly higher than FSH, and
high AMH. Her TVUSS confirms PCOS, with a corpus luteum suggesting recent ovulation.
David’s SFA shows a sperm count of 10 million/ml with reduced total motility and morphology.
C On review you should explain that there are two problems: infrequent ovulation and abnormal
sperm count. Together with the length of infertility, these problems mean that IVF and ICSI are
indicated. There is no need to check for tubal patency as it is irrelevant. Treatment of ovulation
induction or IUI will not give good pregnancy rates because the sperm count is low.

SBA QUESTIONS
1 A 32-year-old woman and her partner are assessed for 2 years’ subfertility. The SFA has been
checked and is normal, and the woman has a normal hormone profile and normal markers for
ovarian reserve. The TVUSS is normal. She has a 3-year history of premenstrual pain for 3 days
before each period, constant right iliac fossa pain and dyspareunia.
What is the most suitable test for tubal potency? Choose the single best answer.
A Hysteroscopy.
B HyCoSy.
C HSG.
D Laparoscopy and dye insufflation.
E MRI.
ANSWER
D The symptoms raise the concern of endometriosis. Hysteroscopy alone will not determine tubal
potency. HyCoSy should be used for low-risk women. HSG is suitable and will show tubal
potency and would be appropriate for someone who declined surgery or was at high risk. MRI
will sometimes diagnose endometriotic implants and rectovaginal nodules. However, laparoscoy
and dye is the best choice as it will enable simultaneous diagnosis of tubal potency, pelvic causes
of pain such as endometriosis and adhesions, and will permit treatment of endometriosis, which
may be causing the symptoms.
2 A woman aged 34 years and her 32-year-old partner have had 8 years’ infertility and have attended
a fertility clinic. The woman has been shown to have a normal hormone profile with normal
ovarian reserve and the TVUSS is normal. A HyCoSy has demonstrated tubal patency. The SFA
has shown a sperm count of 6 million/ml and motility of 20%.
What should they be advised is the most suitable treatment? Choose the single best answer.
A IVF and ICSI.
B IUI.
C PGD.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

D Ovulation induction.
E IVF alone.
ANSWER
A The sperm count and motility is very low and IUI will have very low pregnancy rates. In IVF alone
the fertilization rate of eggs will be low, resulting in few embryos to transfer, hence a low
pregnancy rate. Ovulation induction is not a suitable treatment as there is no ovulation problem.
PGD is not required unless there is a diagnosed inheritable genetic disease. If the sperm count was
below 1 million/ml, further male genetic testing for sex chromosome abnormalities and balanced
translocations would be indicated. Absence of one vas deferens would indicate the need for cystic
fibrosis testing. IVF and ICSI will give good fertilization rates and a good chance of pregnancy for
this couple.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

www.medicalebookpdf.com

CHAPTER 8

The menopause and postreproductive health
EDWARD MORRIS

Definitions
Physiological menopause
Non-physiological menopause
Postmenopausal reproductive health
Assessment of the menopausal woman
Hormonal replacement therapy
Further reading
Self assessment

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
• Know the definition of menopause.
• Understand physiological and non-physiological menopause.
• Understand the effect of menopause on women.
• Understand the modifiable and non-modifiable aspects of menopausal health.
• Explain the main forms of treatment of the menopause.
• Know the side-effects and the relative and absolute contraindications of hormonal replacement
therapy (HRT).
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• Describe the benefits of hormonal and non-hormonal HRT.

Definitions
The menopause is defined as the woman’s final menstrual period and the accepted confirmation of this is
made retrospectively after 1 year of amenorrhoea. The cause of the menopause is cessation of regular
ovarian function. There is great heterogeneity in the experiences of different women as they go through the
menopausal transition and several descriptive phrases exist, which can cause confusion amongst
practitioners and women alike.

Descriptive terms for menopause
• Menopause: the last menstrual period (LMP).
• Perimenopause: time of life from the onset of ovarian dysfunction until 1 year after the last period
and the diagnosis of menopause is made. This time is also known as the climacteric.
• Postmenopause: all women who have been 1 year since their last period are deemed
postmenopausal.
• The ‘change’: a colloquial description of perimenopause and postmenopause.

Physiological menopause
Timing of the menopause
The average age of the menopause worldwide has not changed for decades (Figure 8.1) remaining at a
median age of between 51 and 52 years, with 95% of women attaining menopause between the age of 45
and 55 years. Menopause occurring outside these ages is relatively rare and premature ovarian failure is
discussed later.

Endocrine changes
Current understanding is that menopause occurs at the time of the depletion of oocytes from the ovary and
is irreversible. Groundbreaking and yet to be widely accepted research challenges this assumption, with
the finding of oogonial stem cells from primordial follicles in the ovary. This might radically affect our
understanding of the menopause and offer the remote possibility of being able to influence the timing of
menopause.
Unsurprisingly, the endocrinology is not as simple as the ovaries just running out of eggs and the
capacity to produce hormones at a particular age. As discussed in Chapter 3, Hormonal control of the
menstrual cycle and hormonal disorders, reproductive function is maintained by a subtle interplay of the
hypothalamic production of gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH), the pituitary hormones luteinizing
hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), the ovarian peptide hormone inhibin B and the
www.medicalebookpdf.com

steroid hormones oestrogen, progesterone and testosterone. These hormones not only change during the
menstrual cycle but also throughout a woman’s reproductive life, with their production changing at
differing times and rates according to the age of the woman (Table 8.1).
Inhibin B is produced by follicles within the ovary, so as the number of follicles decline the
production of inhibin decreases. In the perimenopausal years small declines in inhibin drive an overall
increase in the pulsatility of GnRH secretion and overall serum FSH and LH levels, which results in an
increased drive to the remaining follicles in an attempt to maintain follicle production and oestrogen
levels.
Androgenic hormone production comes from ovaries, peripheral adipose tissue and the adrenal
glands, with the ovaries producing approximately 30–50% of total circulating levels. A decline in ovarian
testosterone and other androgens accompanies the process of ageing in women, although these changes are
less dependent on the neuroendocrine axis and the processes involved in ovulation. This is shown by the
fact that overall androgen concentrations in a woman in her 20s are approximately double those at 40
years old and then slowly decline over the rest of her life, with very low levels maintained from about 70
years.

Figure 8.1 Age of menopause and mean life expectancy in the UK since 1850.

Table 8.1 Female hormone production and changes around the menopausal years

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Diagnosis
The diagnosis of menopause is a largely clinical diagnosis that is made according to symptoms
experienced, such as menstrual irregularities and amenorrhoea, and oestrogen deficiency symptoms, such
as vasomotor symptoms.
The use of serum endocrine tests such as hormone levels are of little value in the perimenopausal
years as they are unpredictable due to the hormonal variations that frequently occur in association with
episodic and irregular ovulatory cycles at this time of life. An elevated serum FSH in association with a
low serum oestradiol may be suggestive of menopause, but as this combination of levels can occur during
a normal menstrual cycle this test can therefore be misleading.
In all women in whom a diagnosis of menopause is being considered, the possibility of pregnancy
should also be considered. The special circumstance of diagnosis of menopause in a woman who has
undergone hysterectomy can be difficult due to the lack of signalling from the bleeding that accompanies
the menstrual cycle. However, in these circumstances the use of other symptoms of the menopause as
biological indicators is usually enough to make a confident diagnosis.

Non-physiological menopause
Premature ovarian insufficiency
If menopause occurs before the age of 40 years it is defined as premature ovarian insufficiency (POI),
also sometimes called premature ovarian failure (POF), or premature menopause. It is thought to occur in
approximately 1% of women under 40 years and 0.1% under 30 years. It is a distressing diagnosis for a
woman to receive, especially if it occurs prior to the completion of her family. For young women who
wish to conceive, gamete donation is the only option.
POI is usually diagnosed following either primary or secondary amenorrhoea. Women who have a
diagnosis of POI can experience unpredictable spontaneous ovarian activity, resulting in irregular vaginal
bleeding and the small risk of pregnancy.
While no cause is found in most cases of primary POI, a suspected case should be investigated where
possible for causes that are associated with issues that require separate treatment, as detailed in Table
8.2.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

All women with POI should be offered supportive care and counselling delivered by a specialist unit
to ensure that they fully understand their condition, the specifics of their reproductive needs and that they
receive an individualized package of care with close attention to both short-term and long-term
management of their health.

Table 8.2 Principal causes of premature ovarian insufficiency
Primary

Chromosome anomalies (e.g. Turner’s, fragile X)
Autoimmune disease (e.g. hypothyroidism, Addison’s, myasthenia gravis)
Enzyme deficiencies (e.g. galactosaemia, 17a-hydroxylase deficiency)

Secondary

Chemotherapy or radiotherapy
Infections (e.g. tuberculosis, mumps, malaria, varicella)

Iatrogenic menopause – medical treatments and menopause after
cancer treatment
There is an increasing array of non-surgical treatments that result in an iatrogenic temporary or permanent
menopause and there is an increasing number of women living long lives but with permanent menopause,
often from an early age. Modern screening programmes, technologies to achieve early diagnoses in
suspected malignancy and early radical treatment of female reproductive tract malignancy have
contributed to this. Such women, especially those under the age of 40 years, must be carefully counselled
as to what to expect prior to definitive irreversible treatment, and then managed as someone with POI
thereafter. Special consideration should be given to women whose lifelong treatment demands a hormonefree environment, as these women will need to manage on regimes that avoid hormone replacement.
If GnRH is given in a constant high dose, it desensitizes the GnRH receptor and reduces LH and FSH
release. Drugs that are GnRH agonists (e.g. buserelin and goserelin) can be used as treatments for
endometriosis and other gynaecological problems. Although they mimic the GnRH hormone, when
administered continuously they will down-regulate the pituitary and consequently decrease LH and FSH
secretion. This will induce a temporary menopause with a relatively rapid onset, which can be managed
with the introduction of hormone therapies and other drugs to relieve some of the unwanted menopausal
symptoms – known as add-back therapy.

Iatrogenic menopause – surgical menopause
Women may be placed into surgical menopause aiming to permanently treat benign gynaecological
conditions such as menstrual disorders, fibroids and endometriosis. Bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy
(BSO) may also be performed prophylactically for women at high risk of inherited malignancies such as
breast and ovarian cancer, with BRCA 1 and 2 gene mutation screening. Good clinical practice in these
women should ensure that before making the irreversible decision to have a BSO for these diseases they
consider the correct time in their life for the procedure and that they are given plans for how they can
manage the sudden hormone deficits that they will have to endure. It is important during preparation that
they are aware that as well as losing oestrogen they will also lose the effect of testosterone.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Postmenopausal reproductive health
Overview
As the UK population expands it is clear from data predictions from the Office for National Statistics
Projection that longevity is also going to increase. The whole UK female population is projected to
increase in the 25 years between 2012 and 2037 from 32.4 to 36.8 million girls and women. The vast
majority of this 4.4 million increase is accounted for by the over 50 year age group, increasing from 11.9
to 15.8 million women over the same time period (Figure 8.2).
This means that the population of women who are likely to experience problems during their
postreproductive years will expand by one-third over the next 25 years. Given that we already understand
that the ageing population places a significant strain on the health care system of any country, it makes it
more important than ever to try to improve the health of these women in a preventative fashion.

Figure 8.2 Population projections. Females over 50 years in the UK. Office for National Statistics
Projection data 2012–2037, extracted and plotted by Author.
Medicine traditionally delivers health care in system- and condition-specific silos, such as cardiology,
urogynaecology, bone medicine, surgical site-specific cancers, etc. This is sensible when it comes to
delivery of specialist expertise, but when designing strategies to prevent diseases it makes much more
sense to look at the various stages in a woman’s life and what measures can be taken at different ages to
reduce the risk of disease later in life. This may be described as a continuum of care. A good example of
this approach is the management of obesity in postmenopausal women. While it is well understood that
obesity increases the risk of cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes, it is less well known that obesity
in the postmenopausal woman increases the risk of hot flushes, breast cancer and endometrial cancer. In
addition, as the woman gets older obesity increases the risk of falls, fractures and stroke, all of which
attract a high mortality rate.
Bringing all of these items together in primary care to make a health improvement plan in the early
menopause could significantly improve a woman’s health and on a population basis could mean
www.medicalebookpdf.com

significant reductions in health care resource use.

How women are affected by the menopause
The hormonal changes during and after the menopause have radical changes on the woman. The timing of
when each system is affected not only varies dramatically between women, but also the degree of how the
changes influence each woman is remarkably unpredictable. The reasons for these variations are not
clearly understood but there is some evidence that genetic influences play a part.
While most effects of the menopause have long-term implications, the effects of menopause are
commonly categorized as having an early onset or an onset in the medium to long term (Table 8.3).

Central nervous system
Vasomotor symptoms
Some of the earliest changes during the menopause are the onset of vasomotor symptoms that often appear
during the perimenopausal years. The colloquial term applied to vasomotor symptoms is ‘hot flush’, and
when a hot flush occurs at night it is termed ‘night sweat’.

Table 8.3 Effects of the menopause by time of onset

Immediate (0–5 years)

Vasomotor symptoms, (e.g. hot flushes, night sweats)
Psychological symptoms (e.g. labile mood, anxiety, tearfulness)
Loss of concentration, poor memory
Joint aches and pains
Dry and itchy skin
Hair changes
Decreased sexual desire

Intermediate (3–10 years)

Vaginal dryness, soreness
Dyspareunia
Urgency of urine
Recurrent urinary tract infections
Urogenital prolapse

Long term (>10 years)

Osteoporosis
Cardiovascular disease
Dementia

The exact aetiology of a vasomotor symptom is unknown but is thought to be loss of the modulating
effect of oestrogen on serotinergic receptors within the thermoregulatory centre in the brain, resulting in
exaggerated peripheral vasodilatory responses to minor atmospheric changes in temperature.
Hot flushes occur in up to 80% of women, with less than 30% seeking help. Perhaps the most
distressing effect of vasomotor symptoms is through the occurrence of night sweats. The woman may be
www.medicalebookpdf.com

asleep at the time of the sweat, but during the episode she can be fully woken or her level of sleep can be
converted from deep rapid eye movement (REM) sleep to a shallower sleep that is less refreshing. Such
disturbances lead to tiredness, exhaustion, poor performance during the day and impaired quality of life.
While hot flushes tend to appear unpredictably, additional triggers include alcohol, caffeine and
smoking. Women with a high body mass index (BMI) tend to get worse vasomotor symptoms.

Psychological symptoms
While there is little evidence to support a direct effect of the menopause as a cause for depression, it is
clear that menopause is associated with low mood, irritability, lack of energy, tiredness and impaired
quality of life from the early perimenopausal period.
Some of these symptoms may be attributed to hormonal changes but it is also important to consider
other external influences on mood such as relationship and family changes, financial issues, previous
history of depression and anxiety and the woman’s attitude to ageing.

Figure 8.3 Vaginal epithelium in a (A) premenopausal woman and (B) a postmenopausal woman showing
atrophic changes. Note the loss of epithelial structure and architecture. (Reproduced with permission,
Whitehead MI, Whitcroft SIJ, Hillard TC (1993). An Atlas Of The Menopause. Carnforth, Lancs, UK:
Parthenon.)

Cognitive function
At present there is no clear evidence that menopause is associated with an acceleration of the onset or
incidence of dementia. Most women, however, complain of some change in memory and global cognitive
function around the time of the menopause. It is likely that these changes can partly be explained by the
impact of vasomotor symptoms and other symptoms on patterns of sleep.

The genital tract
Changes in menstrual bleeding are amongst the key symptoms and signs that herald the effects of the onset
of the menopause on the endometrium. They occur relatively soon during the process of menopausal
transition. However, it is important to consider that other areas within the genital tract such as the vulva,
vagina and urinary tract may also be affected.

Endometrial effects
www.medicalebookpdf.com

The initial irregular or scanty vaginal bleeding is due to the reduction in oestrogenic endometrial
stimulation with failing ovarian function, ultimately resulting in periods completely stopping when the
endometrium is no longer stimulated.
Episodic and infrequent ovulation with fluctuations in oestrogen levels leads to unpredictable
progestogenic levels, which usually has the effect of inadequate regular endometrial shedding. This can
then lead to some women experiencing irregular heavy bleeding.

The urogenital tract and vulvovaginal atrophy
Once oestrogen levels start to fall in the perimenopausal years, many women, particularly those who are
sexually active, may become aware of vaginal dryness, irritation, burning, soreness and dyspareunia. Loss
of the oestrogenic support to the vaginal epithelium leads to reduced cellular turnover and reduced
glandular activity, leading to a vaginal epithelium that is less elastic and more easily traumatized (Figure
8.3). Other conditions that frequently worsen during the menopause, including incontinence and prolapse,
are covered in Chapter 10, Urogynaecology and pelvic floor problems.
The inherent resistance of the urogenital system to infection is also impaired, considered to be due to
an increase in pH of the normally mildly acidic environment within the vagina. The incidence of urinary
tract infections is also increased, as is the incidence of episodes of minor cystitis that can accompany
sexual activity.
Examination of women with postmenopausal urogenital atrophy normally demonstrates dryness
affecting most of the surfaces of the vagina along with pallor and, in extreme cases, small petechial
haemorrhages. Older women may also have shrinkage and fusion of the labia along with narrowing of the
vaginal introitus.
All women experience these changes in the lower genital tract to some degree. It is an intimate area
that many women may have difficulty raising in conversation, even though they may be experiencing
severe symptoms, so it is therefore essential that health care professionals looking after these women
proactively ask about and manage these issues.

Bone health
One of the best understood areas of long-term postreproductive health is the changes in bone that occur on
loss of the oestrogenic support of skeletal metabolism. To fully understand this area it is important to be
aware of the fact that the skeleton is maintained by a constant process of remodelling, with bone being
laid down by osteoblasts and resorbed by osteoclasts (Figure 8.4). The balance of the rates of resorption
vs. deposition is affected by many different factors, one of which is oestrogen. An important consideration
is the attainment of peak bone mass (Figure 8.5). Bone density naturally increases during childhood,
reaching a peak between 20 and 30 years of age. Males generally achieve a greater peak bone density in
comparison to females. After peak bone mass attainment in women there is a steady decline until the
menopause, then an accelerated phase of bone loss until 60 years, followed by further steady decline until
death. After the age of 60 in women, the likelihood of osteoporotic fractures of the hip and spine
increases.
Osteoporosis is defined as ‘a skeletal disorder characterized by compromised bone strength
predisposing to an increased risk of fracture’. It is more frequent in women than men with an approximate
ratio of 4:1.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 8.4 Electron micrograph of trabecular bone showing (A) normal structure and (B) osteoporotic
bone. Note the loss of architecture and density in (B) making the bone weaker and more prone to fracture.
(Reproduced with permission, Whitehead Malcolm I, Whitcroft SIJ, Hillard TC (1993). An Atlas Of The
Menopause. Carnforth, Lancs, UK: Parthenon.)

Risk factors for osteoporosis
• Family history of osteoporosis or hip fracture.
• Smoking.
• Alcoholism.
• Long-term steroid use.
• POI and hypogonadism.
• Medical treatment of gynaecological conditions with induced menopause.
• Disorders of thyroid and parathyroid metabolism.
• Immobility.
• Disorders of gut absorption, malnutrition, liver disease.

Cardiovascular system
Approximately 30% of all deaths occur as a result of ischaemic heart disease and stroke. This makes
cardiovascular disease (CVD) a condition that significantly burdens the global health system. While
management of CVD is not usually within the realms of the gynaecologist, it is important to recognize that
because many women seek the help of a gynaecologist during their life there may be significant
opportunities for identification of, and improvement in, modifiable risk factors for CVD.
During the menopausal transition there are several changes in the female physiology that can influence
individual risk of CVD. These include lifestyle issues such as nutrition and exercise, changes in the
distribution in fat from a more gynaecoid (fat on breasts and hips) to android (abdominal fat deposition)
and changes in serum lipid levels that include increases in triglycerides, total cholesterol and low-density
lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol with reduction in high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Oestrogen also has a supportive effect on the vessel wall that favours vasodilatation and prevents
atherogenesis; effects that are reduced after the menopause.

Figure 8.5 The principal stages of the bone remodelling cycle represented diagrammatically (left) with
corresponding light micrographs of iliac crest biopsies (right). A: Resorption by osteoclasts (OC); B:
reversal with disappearance of OC; C: OC formation with the deposition of osteoid by osteoblasts (OB);
D: mineralization of the osteoid; E: completion of the cycle with bone lining cells on the surface (LC).
(Light micrographs reproduced with permission, Dempster DW [1992]. Disorders of the Bone and
Mineral Metabolism. New York: Raven Press.)

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Assessment of the menopausal woman
Key to any consultation around the menopause is not only to assess the impact of the menopause on the
systems discussed above, but also to take the opportunity to appraise the presence of other risk factors,
both modifiable and non-modifiable, that may affect health and longevity.

Modifiable and non-modifiable risk factors affecting health and
longevity
Relevant symptoms
• Vasomotor.
• Urogenital tract, including sexual concerns.
• Cognition.
• Joint pains.
• Vaginal bleeding (if relevant).
Signs
• Blood pressure.
• BMI.
• Vaginal assessment including cervical smear.
• Breast examination if indicated.
Lifestyle
• Exercise levels.
• Nutrition.
• Smoking and alcohol intake.
• Relationship and sexual history.
• Contraceptive needs.
Personal medical/gynaecological history
• Obstetric history.
• Administration of drugs that influence oestrogen levels.
• Age of menopause.
• History of cancer and cancer treatment.
• Chronic disease and treatment.
• Corticosteroid administration.
• Fracture history.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Family history
• CVD.
• Osteoporosis.
• Thromboembolic disease.
There is rarely a need for investigations to confirm menopause. While a serum FSH level more than 30
IU/l is highly suspicious of menopause, the diagnosis can be confidently made in most women based on
history alone; the key features being oligo/amenorrhoea and the typical symptoms of vasomotor symptoms,
joint aches and minor cognitive changes.
The moment a perimenopausal woman presents for an assessment as to whether she is menopausal or
not gives an important opportunity for preventative health care. It is important to address her reasons for
presentation, but also to appraise her compliance with various national screening programmes, her
general health and opportunities for improvement in health. Nationally, it is recognized that not all women
spontaneously present for such advice and there are currently national campaigns to lobby for funding for
at least one such ‘health check’ to occur at or around the menopause.

Management
Key to the management of the postmenopausal woman is, as discussed above, to embrace the main
message of prevention of long-term health problems in the context of managing any menopause-related
symptoms.

Diet and lifestyle
Extensive evidence exists to support improved longevity with regular exercise, stopping smoking and
reducing alcohol consumption. Most will be aware of the beneficial effects of the above measures, which
are well publicized, including reduced heart disease and the prevention of lung cancer and liver disease.
However, few will be aware of the additional benefits of these actions, which should be emphasized in
the menopausal consultation (Table 8.4).

Table 8.4 Beneficial effects of various lifestyle changes in postmenopausal women
Stopping smoking

Prevention of lung cancer
Reduction of CVD
Beneficial effects on bone loss

Reducing alcohol consumption

Reduction of calorie intake
Fewer, less severe vasomotor symptoms
Beneficial effects on bone loss
Prevention of alcohol-related liver damage
Reduction in incidence of breast cancer
Reduction of CVD
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Normal BMI

Reduction of calorie intake
Fewer, less severe vasomotor symptoms
Beneficial effects on bone loss
Reduction in incidence of breast cancer
Reduction in incidence of endometrial cancer
Reduction of CVD

BMI, body mass index; CVD, cardiovascular disease.

One of the more challenging messages to communicate to women after the menopause is that on
average body weight increases by approximately 1 kg per year and this, along with a more android fat
distribution, contributes to a greater sensation of being overweight. Often women who start HRT early in
the menopause erroneously blame this weight gain on HRT. They should be informed that there is no
evidence from extensive research to support the belief that hormone therapy causes weight gain.

Non-hormonal approaches
Most women on experiencing the early symptoms of the menopause will seek out a solution from the wide
range of alternative and ‘natural’ solutions available in reputable pharmacies, supermarkets, health food
shops, high street herbalists, clinics and on-line suppliers with various levels of reliability. Usually a
woman will present for medical input after she has tried or discounted some of the above measures. She
should be informed of the beneficial effects of lifestyle measures before exploring appropriate nonhormonal measures.

Alternative and complementary treatments
These groups of treatments are widely available (Table 8.5) but very poorly researched in the scientific
manner that the medical profession requires to make evidenced-based clinical decisions. This can make it
difficult to fully counsel a woman as to how effective the treatment is, how long any effect will last and,
most importantly, how safe the therapy is. Efficacy is usually limited and of a short duration, with the
potential for interactions with other pharmaceutical agents.
When counselling a woman about taking ‘natural’ hormones, it is important to make her aware that
these are essentially weak HRT and that if they are taking a high-dose therapy there is a possibility they
could be exposing themselves to the known risks of HRT.

Non-hormonal prescription treatments
This group of therapies (Table 8.6) is increasingly important to consider in the management of women to
reduce symptoms of hot flushes when hormones are not wanted or contraindicated, for example previous
diagnoses of hormone-sensitive cancers such as breast cancer.
Other issues specific to the menopause can also be treated without hormones using prescribable
preparations. These include vaginal moisturizers and lubricants for vaginal dryness and some of the many
therapies for treating osteoporosis, which include bisphosphonates, raloxifene denosumab and
teriparatide.

Table 8.5 Alternative and complementary treatments
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Complementary drug-free therapies (delivered by a
practitioner)

Acupuncture
Reflexology
Magnetism
Reiki
Hypnotism

Herbal/natural preparations (designed to be ingested)

Black cohosh (Actaea racemosa)
Dong quai (Angelica sinensis)
Evening primrose oil (Oenothera biennis)
Gingko (Gingko biloba)
Ginseng (Panax ginseng)
Kava kava (Piper methysticum)
St John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum)

‘Natural’ hormones (designed to be ingested or applied
to the skin)

Phytoestrogens such as isoflavones and
red clover
Natural progesterone gel
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA)

Table 8.6 Non-hormonal treatments for vasomotor symptoms
Alpha-adrenergic agonists

Clonidine

Beta-blockers

Propanolol

Modulators of central neurotransmission

Venlafaxine
Fluoxetine
Paroxetine
Citalopram
Gabapentin

Hormonal replacement therapy
HRT has been the mainstay of the treatment of menopausal symptoms for decades. Its use has always
attracted controversy, initially in its promotion as a drug with rejuvenating abilities, and then during a
period where long-term benefits on osteoporosis and CVD prevention from large cohort studies were
appearing. In 2002 a large randomized trial highlighted a series of potential risks from HRT use. This
attracted so much media attention that many women either stopped treatment themselves or their
prescribers stopped prescribing.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Since the initial publication of this study there have been significant changes in the data presented from
the study. These new data, along with subsequent studies, have either significantly reduced or removed the
risks initially described. It is important when digesting the risks of hormone therapy that recent
publications (preferably after 2010) are considered.

Types of hormones contained in HRT
Oestrogens
There is a group of hormones with oestrogenic activity. If oestrogen is given without progestogenic
opposition, there is a risk that in time endometrial hyperplasia and cancer may develop. Systemic
oestrogen-only HRT is suitable for women who no longer have a uterus following a hysterectomy.

Oestrogen with progestogen
The administration of progestogen is necessary to protect the endometrium in women who have not had a
hysterectomy. It is normally given cyclically in preparations over a 28-day cycle, of which 16–18 days
will provide oestrogen alone and 10–12 days will provide oestrogen and progesterone combined
(cyclical HRT). This results in regular monthly menstruation and is suitable for women during the
perimenopause or early postmenopausal years.
Oestrogen and progesterone may be given continuously (continuous combined HRT) to women who
are known to be postmenopausal or over the age of 54 years. These are usually preparations with the
same dose of daily oestrogen combined with a smaller dose of progestogen taken every day. These
regimes normally result in about 90% of women not experiencing vaginal bleeding.
Several types of progestogens are used in HRT by different manufacturers. A change of type, dose or
route of progestogen is occasionally required to reduce unwanted side-effects of the drug.

Hormones used in HRT
• Oestrogens:
• oestradiol (the main physiological oestrogen);
• oestrone sulphate;
• oestriol;
• congugated equine oestrogen.
• Progestogens:
• norethisterone;
• levonorgestrel;
• dydrogesterone;
• medroxyprogesterone acetate;
• drospirenone;
• micronized progesterone.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Testosterone
Testosterone has traditionally been given to women with disorders of sexual desire and energy levels
who have failed to respond to normal HRT. These beneficial effects of testosterone are well documented;
however, few long-term studies into the adverse effects of testosterone exist.
Over the past years manufacturers have stopped making testosterone drugs for women to the point that
the only available preparations available now are those licensed for use in men. This usually means that
testosterone needs to be instigated under the care of a doctor with specialist menopause knowledge.

Routes of hormone therapy administration
The two main routes of HRT delivery are oral and transdermal. The oral route is normally a daily tablet
that contains the appropriate mix of oestrogen and progestogen, depending on the preparation. The oral
route is convenient and cheap but does influence lipid metabolism and the coagulation system through its
effects on the liver during first-pass metabolism.
The transdermal route, either given as patches applied to the skin on the trunk or as measured amounts
of gel, is also effective, with the advantage of delivery of oestradiol directly into the circulation, avoiding
the above potentially adverse effects on the liver and the coagulation system. Oestradiol is also available
as small vaginal tablets and a vaginal ring, and oestriol as measured dose vaginal creams that are
important in the management of lower genital tract symptoms.
Progestogen in the form of levonorgestrel may be administered as an intrauterine releasing system
(IUS), Mirena®. This device not only provides contraception and control of troublesome bleeding, but
also provides endometrial protection for up to 5 years (see Chapter 17, Gynaecological surgery and
therapeutics).

Beneficial effects of hormone therapy
Vasomotor symptoms
The principal reason for taking HRT is vasomotor symptom improvement. Well over 90% of women note
a significant improvement within 6 weeks, with reductions in frequency and severity of hot flushes and
night sweats and consequent improvements in sleep and daytime energy levels as well as concentration.

The skeleton
The protective effects of HRT on the skeleton include prevention of bone loss and the prevention of
osteoporotic fractures of the hip and spine. The use of HRT is strongly recommended for women after
POF as they are at a much greater risk of osteoporosis. Most postmenopausal women should consider
HRT as a means to prevent bone loss, especially if they require HRT for other symptomatology.

Key benefits of HRT
• Symptoms improved:
• vasomotor symptoms;
• sleep patterns;
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• performance during the day.
• Prevention of osteoporosis:
• increased bone mineral density;
• reduced incidence of fragility fractures.
• Lower genital tract:
• dryness;
• soreness;
• dyspareunia;
• CVD: preventative effect if started early in menopause.

The lower genital tract
Both systemic and locally administered HRT have significant beneficial effects on the lower genital tract.
There is good evidence that its administration improves vulvovaginal dryness, irritation, soreness and
dyspareunia. There is also an improvement in symptoms of cystitis and occasionally dysuria. Local
hormone therapy is unlikely to cure prolapse but may improve some of the symptoms of prolapse. There is
no evidence that local HRT improves incontinence. Many women considering local HRT are dissuaded
from its use due to concerns about the published risks. They can often be reassured that were they to use
the form of local hormone therapy as a 10 µg twice weekly dose vaginal tablet, they would only be
administering approximately the equivalent of a 1 mg oral tablet over a whole year.

The cardiovascular system
The cardiovascular benefits of HRT were first demonstrated in large observational cohort studies. The
principal benefits were reduction in ischaemic heart disease and overall mortality. However the large
randomized Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) study demonstrated reductions in survival from CVD in
women taking HRT. This study has been widely criticized due to the overweight and generally older
population studied, a population probably at greater risk of CVD. The current understanding is that there
is a ‘window of opportunity’ in the perimenopausal or early postmenopausal years during which the
administration of HRT may reduce the morbidity and mortality from CVD by prevention of atheroma
formation.
While the prevention of CVD is not currently a licensed indication for HRT, the data are sufficient to
include a discussion with women that they should consider these benefits.

The colon
While the WHI study demonstrated a clear benefit of HRT on the incidence and mortality of colon cancer,
the use of HRT to prevent this malignancy is not indicated.

Prescribing and side-effects of hormone therapy
Prior to prescribing HRT it is important to weigh up the indications, proposed benefits and potential risks
for each patient individually. For example, hormone therapy may be contraindicated in a patient with a
prior history of breast cancer or thromboembolic disease.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

In general, side-effects with HRT are few and minor. It is therefore important before starting HRT to
ensure that the woman has no contraindications to HRT and to ensure that she has had no serious effects in
the past when on the contraceptive pill, such as venous thrombosis or migraine with aura.

Contraindications and potential side-effects
• Absolute contraindications:
• suspected pregnancy;
• breast cancer;
• endometrial cancer;
• active liver disease;
• uncontrolled hypertension;
• known current venous thromboembolism (VTE);
• known thrombophilia (e.g. Factor V leiden);
• otosclerosis.
• Relative contraindications:
• uninvestigated abnormal bleeding;
• large uterine fibroids;
• past history of benign breast disease;
• unconfirmed personal history or a strong family history of VTE;
• chronic stable liver disease;
• migraine with aura.
• Side-effects associated with oestrogen:
• breast tenderness or swelling;
• nausea;
• leg cramps;
• headaches.
• Side-effects associated with progestogen:
• fluid retention;
• breast tenderness;
• headaches;
• mood swings;
• depression;
• acne.
Most side-effects can be managed with a change in dose of oestrogen or a change in type of
progestogen. Some patients can also benefit from a switch of route. Many women find the IUS a useful
device as it delivers much less progestogen into the circulation, thus reducing progestogenic side-effects.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

The duration for which a woman should take HRT is frequently debated. There is little clear evidence
to support how long, but it is recommended that there should be no exact maximum age at which a woman
should stop HRT, rather employing regular assessment of the woman and her needs along with review of
the type and dose of HRT she is taking.

Risks of hormone therapy
The risks attributed to HRT have attracted much media attention. At present, due to a combination of
reanalysis of the data, new studies and a better understanding of the communication of risk, many more
women are considering HRT in the management of their menopause.

Cancer
Breast cancer is without doubt the cancer that attracts most concern from patients and most attention from
the world’s media. The studies performed still do not fully inform patients of the additional risks they
expose themselves to by using HRT. Useful figures to quote are that the background risk of breast cancer
in the 50–59 year age group is 22.5 per 1,000 women for 7.5 years use of HRT and there may be an
additional 2–6 cancers with combined HRT use, which reduces after stopping HRT. It is important to be
aware that recent data with oestradiol HRT suggest that mortality from breast cancer is not increased and
that certain types of HRT may promote the growth of pre-existing malignant cells rather than initiate
tumours.
Endometrial cancer and ovarian cancer are not considered significant risks with HRT use.
Endometrial malignancy risk is largely eliminated if women are given progestogens. Incidence of ovarian
cancer has not been shown to significantly increase with HRT use.

Cardiovascular disease and stroke
As discussed above, most of the effects of HRT on the cardiovascular system when given to younger
women are beneficial. However, when given to older women the effects may become deleterious. The
degree to which this happens is unclear but is likely to be higher in women taking combined HRT.
Stroke incidence has a similar age effect, with the increased incidence greater in the older woman.
The effect is small and is only on the incidence of ischaemic stroke, thought to be an increase of an
additional 2 women per 10,000 women per year when on HRT.

Venous thromboembolism
The influence of HRT on the clotting system is similar to that of the oral contraceptive. The background
incidence of all VTE in women over 50 is low (approximately 15–20 per 10,000) and HRT doubles this
risk. There is evidence to suggest that transdermal HRT, through its avoidance of effects on the liver, may
not have such a great effect on VTE incidence.

KEY LEARNING POINTS
• The menopause is a key time in the life of a woman.
• The physiological changes that occur have significant effects on the woman as a whole, affecting
numerous body systems.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• Care of women during the postreproductive years should be managed in a holistic fashion that
addresses lifestyle and general health issues first. Using such an approach can address many
elements of health, improving longevity and quality of life.
• HRT exists in a variety of forms and is effective in improving menopausal symptoms and bone
mineral density.
• The potential use of HRT in prevention of disease, while considering the small additional risks its
use attracts, means that over the coming years it may become a cost-effective means of improving
the lives of the expanding numbers of the global population of menopausal women.

Further reading
Lobo RA1, Davis SR, De Villiers TJ, et al. (2014). Prevention of diseases after menopause.
Climacteric 17(5):540–56.
Panay N, Hamoda H, Arya R, Savvas M; British Menopause Society and Women’s Health Concern
(2013). The 2013 British Menopause Society & Women’s Health Concern recommendations on
hormone replacement therapy. Menopause Int 19(2):59–68.
Rees M, Stevenson J, Hope S, Rozenberg S, Palacios S (2009). Management of the Menopause, 5th
Edition. London: Royal Society of Medicine Press and British Menopause Society Publications.

Self assessment
CASE HISTORY
Mrs A is a 36-year-old woman. She has had one child delivered normally 6 years previously after a
brief period of subfertility. Following delivery of that child she had 4 years of infrequent periods
and over the last 2 years she has been amenorrhoeic and has had difficulty sleeping, often waking up
feeling hot.
A What is the likely diagnosis?
B How would the diagnosis be confirmed?
C Following diagnosis Mrs A asks what the immediate and long-term issues are and how they
might be managed. Outline the key issues.
ANSWERS
A POI.
B A combination of the clinical picture and serum FSH levels are usually adequate to confirm the
diagnosis. On receipt of one elevated FSH level it is recommended that a repeat test no sooner
than 6 weeks after the first is performed to confirm the diagnosis.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

C One of the first issues on diagnosis of POI is to inform Mrs A that there is still an appreciable risk
of unpredictable ovulation and as such her contraceptive needs should be discussed.
The issue of bone protection should be explained to her. With her prolonged entry into POI she
could have osteoporosis or osteopaenia. Consideration of bone densitometry and management with
HRT or bisphosphonates should be considered.
The benefits of HRT should be explained to her. It is often helpful to highlight that because she
has lost her endogenous oestrogen at an early age in comparison to her peers, if she were to take
HRT she would not be exposing herself to any appreciable excess risks from HRT until the age of
approximately 51.

SBA QUESTIONS
1 A 68-year-old woman presents with recurrent episodes of postmenopausal bleeding. The volume
of blood loss is only very small amounts of spotting that often, but not exclusively, follow
intercourse. Her previous gynaecological history is unremarkable, with a lifetime of normal
cervical smears. She is not on any drugs, including HRT. Pelvic ultrasound and endometrial
biopsy are normal. Vaginal examination demonstrates vaginal dryness, small petechiae and loss of
rugae.
What is the most appropriate next step in her management? Choose the single best answer.
A Outpatient hysteroscopic assessment of the endometrium.
B Transdermal continuous combined HRT.
C Water-based vaginal lubricants.
D Oestrogen-containing vaginal pessaries.
E Flexible cystourethroscopy.
ANSWER
D The normal ultrasound and endometrium indicate that there is no concern about endometrial
pathology including malignancy. Therefore, outpatient hysteroscopy or examination of the bladder
with flexible cystourethroscopy is unnecessary. Vaginal lubricants are useful for painful
intercourse but local oestrogen will induce a return of the vagina to premenopausal flexibility and
lubrication. Transdermal oestrogen therapy is not necessary unless there are systemic symptoms of
hypoestrogenism.
2 With regard to the hormone changes that accompany the menopause, which of the following is true?
Choose the single best answer.
A As ovarian function fails, serum FSH levels increase.
B 12 months after the LMP serum levels of testosterone are close to zero.
C Secretion of GnRH from the hypothalamus increases significantly in the late menopause to drive
ovarian activity.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

D Progesterone levels are undetectable in the perimenopause.
E High levels of peripherally-produced oestrogens reduce the frequency and severity of hot
flushes in obese women.
ANSWER
A FSH rises in response to increasing pulsatility of GnRH, itself responding to falling inhibin as the
follicles become depleted in the periomenopause. Subsequently, there is a progressive decline in
GnRH pulsatility and GnRH levels overall fall.
Only 30–50% of testosterone production is ovarian, and levels fall slowly after menopause
because its production is mainly independent of the neuroendocrine axis. Although adipose tissue
produces oestrogen, it is an insulator interfering with heat dissipation; hot flushes are worse in
obese women.
There is a only a slow decline in progesterone during the perimenopause, and so levels remain
detectable.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

www.medicalebookpdf.com

CHAPTER 9

Genitourinary problems
MARGARET KINGSTON

Introduction
Taking a sexual history
Testing for STIs and associated conditions
Human immunodeficiency virus
Conclusion
Further reading
Self assessment

LEARNING OUTCOMES
• Understand the importance of sexually transmitted infections (STIs) in gynaecology.
• Describe the testing, diagnosis and transmission of common STIs and blood-borne viruses (BBVs).
• Understand that support is needed for patients to enable them to undertake screening.
• Appreciate that human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) has changed from life limiting into a chronic,
manageable condition.
• Learn how to take a sexual history.
• Understand the diagnosis of and screening for HIV.
• Describe the care for the HIV-positive mother and child.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Introduction
An understanding of STIs and their complications is crucially important in gynaecological practice. The
subject is frequently misunderstood and the impact on affected women, their partners and at times their
children may be considerable. STIs are often asymptomatic, but can still be transmitted to others and
cause significant problems at the time of infection or in the future; for example, human papillomavirus
(HPV) infection and cervical cancer. STIs disproportionately affect younger people, but increasingly they
are identified in older people, in whom the diagnosis is often not considered and so can be missed. STIs
often coexist and when one is found, screening for others is required.
Tests for STIs have hugely improved in recent years, with the advent of highly sensitive and accurate
molecular tests that are very easy to use and can detect several infections on a single swab or urine
sample. In addition, serological tests for BBVs and syphilis have also increased in accuracy, and can be
performed sooner after possible exposure than in the past. Women are often diagnosed first when they
have young families and they attend for reproductive health care and are offered screening. They require
support to inform present (and where necessary) previous partners, so they can also receive testing and
treatment for their own health to prevent reinfection and/or on-going transmission within the community.
Children may also require testing and treatment if they have been exposed during pregnancy, birth or
breastfeeding. This aspect of managing STIs can be very challenging but is crucially important. The
consultation may lead to a consideration of safeguarding of women and girls who may be exposed to
sexual or domestic violence, abuse, coercion or exploitation, which may only become apparent in this
context.
The treatment and management of HIV infection has been transformed, and the disease has changed
from life limiting into a chronic manageable condition. In addition, effective treatment also prevents
transmission to sexual partners and children. The treatments are simpler with less toxicity and the
widespread availability of cheaper, generic medicines has resulted in therapies that are acceptable,
affordable and manageable, requiring less monitoring than before.
Unfortunately, STIs and HIV remain stigmatizing conditions for many women, who find informing
partners or sharing news of any diagnosis with friends or family very difficult. Consequently they can feel
isolated and may need additional support from their health care professionals. Respecting and maintaining
patient confidentiality is vital when managing women with an STI or HIV diagnosis.

Taking a sexual history
This is the first step to identifying and treating STIs. It allows the health care professional to quantify risk,
decide which tests are required and whether they need to be repeated later, and gather information needed
for treatment. In addition, it provides an opportunity for patients to express concerns and ask questions.
Raising the issue of STIs may be unexpected and it is important to start by ensuring privacy and then
explaining why the subject is being broached, to ask permission to proceed and to reassure the patient
about confidentiality. Important points to cover are summarized in Table 9.1. Abuse, exploitation or
coercion can happen to anyone, but younger women and sexually active children especially so, and
screening questions for this are also included in Table 9.1.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Table 9.1 Points to cover in a sexual history and screening questions for sexual
exploitation

Testing for STIs and associated conditions
Technological advances have facilitated accurate, non-invasive testing for most STIs. Point of care tests
(POCTs) are available for many infections including HIV, but may have suboptimal sensitivity and/or
specificity, and it is important to be aware of these limitations. Close liaison with local laboratory staff is
crucial to ensure the best available tests are used, appropriately interpreted and communicated in a timely
fashion. Table 9.2 summarizes appropriate screening and diagnostic tests.

Infective causes of vaginal discharge (Figure 9.1)
Bacterial vaginosis
The commonest cause of abnormal vaginal discharge, bacterial vaginosis (BV) has been reported in 5–
50% of female cohorts worldwide. While a definitive cause is not determined, depletion of the
lactobacilli dominant in the healthy vaginal flora is observed, together with an elevation of vaginal pH to
www.medicalebookpdf.com

above 4.5. The existence of a vaginal epithelial biofilm consisting of Gardnerella vaginalis and other
species has been more recently described. Other risk factors include douching, black race, smoking,
having a new sexual partner and receiving oral sex.
Symptoms include an offensive vaginal discharge that is often reported as having a ‘fishy’ malodour,
and on examination a homogenous off-white vaginal discharge with a high pH is observed. Diagnosis is
made by evaluating a Gram stain of the vaginal discharge using a validated method, such as the Hay-Ison
or Nugent criteria, or, less frequently in modern practice, by using Amsels criteria (3 of 4 are required:
homogenous discharge, high pH, ‘clue cells’ on microscopy and a fishy odour when 10% potassium
hydroxide is added to a sample of discharge). BV is associated with a number of pathologies including
pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), posthysterectomy vaginal cuff cellulitis and, in pregnancy, preterm
birth and rupture of membranes and miscarriage. An increased risk of HIV acquisition is observed in
women at risk with BV.
Oral or intravaginal treatments with metronidazole or clindamycin are indicated in women with
symptoms or those in whom it is diagnosed and elect for treatment – especially prior to gynaecological
surgical procedures. Women with BV should be advised that vaginal douching or excessive genital
washing should be avoided.

Table 9.2 Tests for STIs and related conditions in women

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 9.1 Vaginal and cervical flora (×1,000 magnified). A: Normal: lactobacilli – seen as large grampositive rods – predominate. Squamous epithelial cells are gram-negative. with a large aount of
cytoplasm. B: Candidiasis: there are speckled gram-positive spores and long pseudohyphae visible.
There are numerous polymorphs present and the bacterial flora is abnormal, resembling bacterial
vaginosis. C: Bacterial vaginosis: there is an overgrowth of anaerobic organisms, including Gardnerella
vaginalis (small gram-variable cocci), and a decrease in the numbers of lactobacilli. A ‘clue cell’ is
seen. This is an epithelial cell covered with small bacteria so the edge of the cell is obscured. D:
Trichomoniasis: an unstained ‘wet mount’ of vaginal fluid from a woman with Trichomonas vaginalis
infection. There is a cone-shaped, flagellated organism in the centre, with a terminal spike and four
flagella visible. In practice, the organism is identified under the microscope by movement, with amoeboid
motion and its flagella waving.

Vulvovaginal candidiasis
This condition occurs when yeast of the Candida species, most frequently C. albicans, cause vulval and
vaginal inflammation. The vagina is colonized with Candida sp. in up to 20% of women in their
reproductive years, rising to 40% in pregnancy, and is most often asymptomatic. When symptoms occur
they include itching, irritation and a typically white, curdy vaginal discharge. On examination, signs of
inflammation, including erythema, oedema and fissuring of the vulva and vagina, together with the
discharge may be observed. Symptoms may be more frequent and persistent when the woman is diabetic,
immunocompromised and in pregnancy. The diagnosis is made by taking a bacterial swab for microscopy
and culture and treatment with topical intravaginal pessaries or oral imidazoles are effective. Topical
www.medicalebookpdf.com

vulval antifungals and the use of aqueous cream as an emollient and cleansing agent provide symptomatic
relief. This is not an STI and partners without symptoms do not require treatment.

Trichomoniasis
Vaginal and urethral infection with the flagellate protozoan Trichomonas vaginalis (TV) results in
symptoms of vaginal discharge with a variable appearance and symptoms and/or signs of vulvovaginitis.
Asymptomatic infection is observed in up to 50% of women and most of their male sexual partners. TV is
sexually transmitted and simultaneous treatment of current and recent sexual partners is required. There is
some evidence of an association with pregnancy outcome: preterm birth, low birthweight and maternal
postpartum sepsis, although further research is required. Testing is indicated in symptomatic women, and
the gold standard is a nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) preferably on a vaginal or endocervical
swab or on urine, with sensitivities and specificities reaching over 95%, depending on the specimen and
the test. Some NAATs also detect Neisseria gonorrhoea and Chlamydia trachomatis on the same sample;
for these the optimal test is a vulvovaginal swab. Microscopy and culture of a sample of the vaginal
discharge and POCT using different techniques are also used but are limited by reduced sensitivity.
Treatment is with a systemic metronidazole regime.

Cervicitis and pelvic inflammatory disease
Gonorrhoea (Figure 9.2)
This condition is caused by infection with the bacteria Neisseria gonorrhoea. Infection occurs through
sexual contact and simultaneous treatment of current and recent sexual partners is required. Endocervical
infection is asymptomatic in up to 50% of cases, with altered vaginal discharge the most common
symptom and lower abdominal pain in up to 25%. Rectal infection occurs through transmucosal spread
and receptive anal sex, and pharyngeal infection through receptive oral sex; the latter is nearly always
asymptomatic. Examination is often normal, although cervicitis with or without a mucopurulent discharge
may be seen. Ascending infection may result in PID and, rarely, haematogenous spread can cause
disseminated gonococcal infection with a purpuric non-blanching rash and/or an arthralgia or arthritis that
is typically monoarticular in a weight-bearing joint. Ophthalmic infection occurs due to inoculation from
infected genital secretions, and neonatal infection occurs when the mother has endocervical infection at
the time of delivery.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 9.2 Gram-stained smear of cervical secretions showing polymorths and gram-negative
intracellular diplococci (×1,000). This appearance is highly suggestive of gonorrhoea.
Testing is indicated in symptomatic women or those who have another STI. NAAT tests are highly
sensitive and specific, and if N. gonorrhoea is identified it is important to obtain a sample for culture and
sensitivity testing as there has been a development of widespread antimicrobiological resistance that
requires careful surveillance. Screening for other STIs is crucial, particularly for C. trachomatis, as dual
infection is common. Dual treatment of uncomplicated infection is presently with a parenteral thirdgeneration cephalosporin plus azithromycin; the recent addition of azithromycin to treatment regimens is
an attempt to delay the emergence of further drug resistance.

Chlamydia
Chlamydial infection is the most common bacterial STI, with women under 25 years of age most
frequently affected. Infection with C. trachomatis is often asymptomatic but can still result in subclinical
PID and subsequent complications. For this reason screening programmes for this age group have been
developed and there is some evidence that they reduce the rates of PID. Testing is also indicated in
women with other risk factors, including a new sexual partner, or those with symptoms that include
altered vaginal discharge, intermenstrual or postcoital bleeding or abdominal pain. Examination is often
normal, but cervicitis with mucopurulent discharge may be present. Infection at other mucosal sites occurs
as in gonorrhoea (although it is thought to a lesser extent) and similarly neonates born to mothers with
cervical infection may develop conjunctivitis. A reactive arthritis that is typically monoarticular affecting
the weight-bearing joints may occur, but is more common in men.
NAAT tests are widely available for C. trachomatis, and some test simultaneously for N. gonorrhoea
with the option to add on testing for TV in women with indicative symptoms. These tests offer high levels
of sensitivity and specificity, and in women the optimal genital specimen is a vulvovaginal swab that may
be self-taken by the woman without compromising diagnostic accuracy. For uncomplicated genital
chlamydia, equally effective treatment regimens include azithromycin or doxycycline; the benefit of the
www.medicalebookpdf.com

former is that it is single dose and well tolerated. Simultaneous treatment of current and recent sexual
partners is required.

Pelvic inflammatory disease
This occurs when there is ascending infection from the endocervix to the higher reproductive tract. It is a
recognized complication of chlamydia and less frequently of gonorrhoea, but they are often not isolated
and other implicated organisms include Mycoplasma genitalium as well as those in the vaginal
microflora. The diagnosis of PID is usually made clinically and symptoms typically include lower
bilateral abdominal pain, dyspareunia, altered vaginal discharge and IMB or PCB. Systemic symptoms of
infection may be present. Characteristic clinical findings include lower abdominal and cervical motion
tenderness and cervicitis. Testing for all STIs is required, as is exclusion of pregnancy. Where PID is
suspected empirical treatment should be started immediately, as delay increases the risk of complications.
These include the sequelae of endometrial and Fallopian tube inflammation and damage such as
subfertility, ectopic pregnancy and chronic pelvic pain. Right upper quadrant pain due to perihepatitis is
an unusual complication called Fitz-Hugh–Curtis syndrome (Figure 9.3).
Laparoscopy in women with PID may reveal scarring and adhesion formation between the structures
of the pelvis and the development of hydrosalpinges of the tubes. There is a predisposition to ectopic
pregnancy (Figure 9.4). If an intrauterine device (IUD) is in situ it is advisable to consider removing this,
although the risk of pregnancy if there has been unprotected sex in the last week should be considered.
Treatment regimes should cover all common pathogens and are 2 weeks in duration; they usually include a
macrolide or tetracycline plus metronidazole with a parenteral third-generation cephalosporin at the start.
Sexual partners require simultaneous screening and empirical treatment, usually with azithromycin.
Women require clear information regarding possible sequelae from their infection.

Viral STIs and systemic manifestations
Genital herpes
There are two types of herpes virus that cause this condition; herpes simplex virus (HSV) type 1 and type
2. HSV-1 causes orolabial herpes also and is often acquired in childhood, although it is also a common
cause of genital herpes alongside HSV-2. Following acquisition the virus establishes latency in the local
sensory ganglia and may reactivate, resulting in shedding of the virus, with or without symptoms. Primary
infection is the first infection of either HSV-1 or -2; non-primary infection is subsequent infection with the
other type. The majority of initial infections are asymptomatic, although the individual may still be
infectious, and subsequent recurrences may be symptomatic. Recurrence rates are significantly higher
with HSV-2 and reduce in frequency with time.
Symptoms include genital pain and dysuria, and on examination there are typically multiple superficial
tender ulcers with regional lymphadenopathy (although this may be limited to the initial infection).
Diagnosis is by detection of the virus from the genital lesions by gently taking a swab. The test of choice
is a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test that types the virus, although less sensitive culture methods are
still used in some centres. Type-specific serology, testing for immunoglobulin (Ig) G and IgM to HSV-1
and -2, can be helpful in establishing whether or not an individual is at risk of infection or if the infection
is primary, non-primary or a recurrence. In clinical practice this is useful when assessing women and
their sexual partners in pregnancy.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 9.3 Fitz-Hugh–Curtis syndrome showing perihepatic adhesions (typical violin string appearance).

www.medicalebookpdf.com

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 9.4 A: Peritubal adhesions of the left Fallopian tube; B: ectopic pregnancy within hydrosalpinx;
C: left Fallopian tube hydrosalpinx; D: large hydrosalpinx of the left Fallopian tube with a smaller
hydrosalpinx on the right side.
Neonatal herpes is a devastating infection with a mortality rate of up to 30% and consequent lifelong
neurological morbidity in up to 70%. It is most often acquired during delivery if the mother has primary
or non-primary initial infection within the third trimester and especially the last 6 weeks, when reported
neonatal infection rates are as high as 41%. IgG to the virus in the serum crosses the placenta and
provides neonatal protection from infection, and the risk of neonatal herpes when the mother has lesions
of recurrent infection present at delivery is less than 3%. For this reason the recommended mode of
delivery for women with first-acquisition genital herpes in the third trimester is prelabour caesarean
section, and in those with proven recurrent lesions, vaginal delivery may be anticipated if other obstetric
factors allow.
Treatment of the symptoms of genital herpes is a course of aciclovir, which is very safe and effective,
including in pregnancy, or a related compound (such as valaciclovir). These medicines are most effective
when given as soon as possible after symptoms develop, and episodic and suppressive regimens are
effective in managing symptoms from repeated recurrences. Information for patients, including the lifelong
nature of the infection, asymptomatic shedding and therefore risk to sexual partners and the need for
disclosure, the effectiveness of condoms (up to 50%) and antivirals in limiting transmission, are
important.

Genital warts
These are benign epithelial tumours caused by HPV infection. There are over 100 genotypes of HPV and
types 6 and 11 cause over 90% of genital warts. Infection with HPV in the genital epithelium via sexual
transmission is extremely common, with the vast majority of cases being subclinical. Infection with the
oncogenic genotypes including types 16 and 18 is also through sex, but these cause anogenital dysplasia
and cancer, not warts. HPV vaccination is available as a bivalent (against types 16 and 18) or
quadrivalent (types 6, 11, 16 and 18) vaccine, and in cohorts where the latter has been introduced (such
as in girls in Australia), a dramatic drop in the cases of genital warts has been observed.
Diagnosis is by clinical examination and treatments include ablative therapies such as application of
liquid nitrogen or surgical techniques or patient-applied topical therapies, including podophyllotoxincontaining preparations or the local immune modulator imiquimod. As these are benign lesions treatment
is optional. When genital warts are present in pregnancy treatment is limited to ablative options. Rarely,
warts may become very large and obstruct the birth canal, necessitating caesarean delivery. Very rarely
the neonate can develop respiratory papillomatosis, but the risk is extremely small and the benefit of
caesarean delivery in preventing this unproven. Screening for other STIs is required and screening for
cervical cancer is as usual.

Syphilis
Syphilis is caused by infection with the bacterium Treponema pallidum subspecies pallidum, which
occurs through direct contact with secretions from an infective lesion or via transplacental passage of the
bacteria during pregnancy. This infection is multisystem and has many clinical features that may mimic
other conditions. Untreated it can relapse and remit and late complications can present many years after
the original infection. Infectivity declines with time and treatment with penicillin-based regimens are
www.medicalebookpdf.com

curative, although reinfection may occur. Those living in African and Asian countries and Eastern Europe
are more often affected, and in the last two decades there have been resurgences of infection observed in
homosexual men in Western countries.
The infection is classified as congenital or acquired, and each of these as late or early. In acquired
early syphilis the initial manifestation is the ‘chancre’, which develops at the site of exposure. This is
usually a single, genital lesion but is increasingly seen at other sites such as the oral cavity and may be
multiple. Typically the lesion is painless, indurated and exudes serous fluid containing T. pallidum, and
there is regional lymphadenopathy. This resolves within a few weeks and following this as the bacteria
disseminate a plethora of variable clinical symptoms and signs may be apparent. These include a
widespread erythematous rash typically including the palms and soles and that can result in alopecia, oral
and genital mucous lesions and raised lesions, usually in the anogenital area, termed ‘condylomata lata’.
Complications include neurological involvement, resulting in meningitis, an eighth nerve palsy and
consequent deafness or tinnitus and ophthalmic involvement, most often uveitis. This stage also
spontaneously resolves as the host immune response is effective in controlling the infection, although
relapse may occur for up to 2 years, the accepted time limit of early infection, and approximately twothirds of infected individuals suffer no further ill effects.
Late complications include:
• Gummatous lesions: granulomatous, locally destructive lesions typically affecting skin and bone.
• Cardiovascular involvement: usually affecting the ascending aorta, resulting in aortic valve
incompetence.
• Neurological involvement: classified as meningovascular disease, tabes dorsalis and a progressive
dementing illness, general paresis.
Congenital infection also consists of many symptoms and signs that are summarized in Table 9.3. The
riskiest time for congenital infection is when syphilis is acquired either very soon before or during
pregnancy. Screening for syphilis in pregnancy is well established, allowing effective treatment of most
women, although infection may occur in pregnancy after this.
Diagnosis is by serology and/or directly detecting T. pallidum in infectious lesions, usually by dark
field microscopy or, more recently, by PCR testing, although availability of this is limited. Nontreponemal serological tests include the rapid plasma reagin (RPR) and Venereal Disease Reference
Laboratory (VDRL), which demonstrate rising titres during acute, active infection that drop with time and
following treatment, and so can be used to monitor treatment. They may be negative in early infection,
falsely positive in other physiological (such as pregnancy) or disease (including several rheumatological
conditions) states, and so require confirmation by non-treponemal tests such as enzyme or
chemiluminescence immunoassays (EIA/CLIA) or T. pallidum particle or haemagglutination assays
(TPPA/TPHA). These treponemal tests may also be negative in the very early stages of disease, and
should be repeated if negative 4–6 weeks later if this is suspected. Serological tests for syphilis may be
positive for life, although reinfection results in the non-treponemal titre rising rapidly. Different testing
algorithms are applied according to locally available tests and expertise is required together with a full
clinical history to interpret their results adequately. Treatment is curative and involves depot preparations
of penicillin; different regimes for differing stages of infection are the treatment of choice. Simultaneous
treatment of current sexual partners is required, certainly in early disease. When the time of infection is
not known, tracing and testing of previous partners, and where applicable children, is required.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Table 9.3 Clinical feature of congenital syphilis
Early (within 2 years)
Common manifestations (one of these is
noted in 40–60% of infants):
Rash
Haemorrhagic rhinitis (bloody
snuffles)
Generalized
lymphadenopathy/hepatosplenomegaly
Skeletal abnormalities
Other manifestations:
Condylomata lata
Vesiculobullous lesions,
osteochondritis
Periostitis
Pseudoparalysis
Mucous patches
Perioral fissures
Non-immune hydrops
Glomerulonephritis neurological +/–
ocular involvement
Haemolysis and thrombocytopenia

Late

These are termed the ‘stigmata of congenital infection’:
Interstitial keratitis
Clutton’s joints
Dental abnormalities including ‘Hutchinson’s incisors’
and ‘mulberry molars’
High palatal arch
Rhagades
Sensineural deafness
Fontal bossing
Short maxilla
Protuberance of mandible saddlenose deformity,
sternoclavicular thickening, paroxysmal cold
haemoglobinuria
Neurological involvement including intellectual
disability, cranial nerve palsies

Human immunodeficiency virus
Natural history, epidemiology, testing and treatment
Infection with HIV results in an initial acute viral illness followed by a chronic decline in cellular
immunity due to progressive depletion of CD4-positive T-lymphocytes, and eventually resulting in one or
more illnesses defined as the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). These are listed in Table 9.4
and, importantly in gynaecological practice, include cervical cancer, cervical intraepithelial neoplasia
(CIN) grade 2/high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) or above and vaginal intraepithelial
neoplasia. HIV infection disproportionately affects those living in or originating from sub-Saharan Africa
and their partners, homosexual men and intravenous drug users without access to clean injecting
equipment. The global burden of HIV infection is depicted in Figure 9.5. Highly active retroviral therapy
(HAART) has transformed the lives of HIV-positive people and their families, making early diagnosis and
treatment crucial to allow maintenance of that individual’s own health and to protect their partners and
children from infection. For this reason USA guidelines recommend offering HIV testing to all those aged
13–64 accessing medical care and antiretroviral therapy to all those found to be HIV positive. The
notification of present and previous partners, and if applicable children, is crucial as treatment in the
earlier asymptomatic stages improves outcomes
and prevents onward transmission.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Gynaecological complications in HIV-positive women
Women with HIV infection are more likely to have infection with HPV 16 or 18 and have a higher
prevalence and incidence of CIN/HSIL. For this reason annual cervical cytology is recommended, with
most guidelines recommending subsequent management as in HIV-negative women. It is worth noting that
other anogenital malignancies resulting from oncogenic HPV infection also occur more frequently and at a
younger age in HIV-positive people.

Table 9.4 AIDS-defining illnesses

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 9.5 Global burden of human infection. (Adapted from UNAIDS data, 2014.)

Contraception and preconception management
Many antiretrovirals interact with hormonal contraceptives, resulting in reduced contraceptive efficacy.
However, this is dependent on the combination of specific medicines, and a holistic assessment is
required assessing the woman’s suitability for, and the availability of, both treatments. The dynamic HIV
drug interaction website from the University of Liverpool (see Further reading) provides accurate
information on specific drug interactions. Non-hormonal contraception such as condoms and IUDs are
appropriate in most circumstances where they would otherwise be offered.
Prior to attempting pregnancy, the health of a HIV-positive woman and her partner should be
optimized. This includes standard health promotion and for serodiscordant couples advice regarding
prevention of HIV transmission. This is achieved by optimal HIV control as transmission between sexual
partners is extremely low when the positive partner has undetectable HIV ribonucleic acid (RNA) levels
(termed the ‘viral load’) in the serum. In addition, screening for and treating coexistent STIs and, where
resources permit, fertility assessment of both partners is good practice. It is appropriate to offer fertility
treatment when this is indicated to couples where one or both are HIV positive, within regulatory
frameworks.

Management of the HIV-positive mother and her child
All pregnant women must know their current HIV status, and those who are positive require access to
high-quality medical and obstetric care. Effective antiretroviral therapy, ensuring an undetectable viral
load in serum towards the end of pregnancy, provides excellent protection of the neonate. Figure 9.6
presents information from the UK national study of HIV in pregnancy and childhood, which clearly
demonstrates this. Most mother-to-child transmission (MTCT) occurs during birth or breastfeeding.
Intrauterine infection is unusual and the risk of this is increased by an intervention that disrupts the
placenta (for example, amniocentesis). Delivery by prelabour caesarean section further reduces MTCT
www.medicalebookpdf.com

rates when the HIV viral load is detectable. Obstetric risk factors that increase the risk of transmission
include prolonged rupture of membranes, procedures that breach the infant’s skin (such as fetal scalp
electrodes) or increase maternal blood in the birth canal; however, these risks are reduced by effective
control of maternal HIV.

Figure 9.6 UK data from the national study of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in pregnancy and
childhood demonstrating efficacy of maternal antiretroviral therapy (ART) in preventing mother-to-child
transmission (MTCT) of HIV. (Adapted from CROI data, 2007.)
Even in the presence of well-controlled HIV, transmission rates to the infant during breastfeeding are
up to 3%, so in circumstances where formula feeding is safe, this is preferable. Where breastfeeding is
safer than formula, exclusive breastfeeding for the first 6 months with rapid weaning so that no mixed
feeding occurs is the safest option, as mixed feeding results in the highest rates of MTCT.

Conclusion
Knowledge of the modern tests and management of STIs and related conditions have been summarized in
this chapter. This is important in gynaecological practice as these conditions are common in women and
have serious implications, but can be effectively managed to minimize the risk of complications and
transmission. HIV in particular has been transformed from a life-limiting condition to a chronic
manageable condition, although offering testing and appropriate management of the condition and
associated comorbidities and of reproductive health in HIV-positive women is crucial.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Further reading
The British Association for Sexual Health & HIV:
http://www.bashh.org/BASHH/Guidelines/Guidelines/BASHH/Guidelines/Guidelines.aspx.
The British HIV Association: http://www.bhiva.org/guidelines.aspx.
The Centres for Disease Control and Prevention CDC: http://www.cdc.gov/std/tg2015/.
The International Union against STIs: http://iusti.org/sti-information/guidelines/default.htm.
United States HIV treatment guidelines: https://aidsinfo.nih.gov/guidelines
Spotting the signs of child sexual exploitation: http://www.bashh.org/documents/Spotting-the-signsA%20national%20proforma%20Apr2014.pdf.
The University of Liverpool HIV Drug interactions website: http://www.hiv-druginteractions.org/.

Self assessment
CASE HISTORY
A 29-year-old woman presents to the emergency gynaecology unit with a 5-day history of lower
abdominal and pelvic pain that has got progressively worse over the last 24 hours. She also feels
generally unwell with chills and rigors. She has had several partners in recent months and was found
to have chlamydia a few weeks ago. She is not sure whether she completed the whole course of
treatment and did not go back to get tested. She does not use any form of contraception and has had
unprotected intercourse recently.
On examination, she looks unwell. She has a raised temperature at 38°C and is tachycardic. She
is very tender on abdominal examination with guarding. On speculum examination, the cervix
appears inflamed with a profuse mucopurulent discharge. A high vaginal swab, endocervical swab
and a urethral swab are taken. On pelvic examination there is marked cervical tenderness. She is
also generally tender to palpate throughout the pelvis and is unable to tolerate the examination. A
pregnancy test is negative.
A What is the diagnosis?
B What tests are required?
C What is the management?
ANSWERS
A The clinical diagnosis is suggestive of acute PID with pelvic peritonitis.
B Vulvovaginal, high vaginal and cervical swabs (as available depending on your local
microbiology service) are taken, as well as a midstream urine sample, full blood count and Creactive protein (CRP). A pelvic ultrasound shows the possibility of an adnexal mass with some
free fluid in the pelvis.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

C She is admitted and started with intravenous antibiotics (ceftriaxone + metronidazole) and oral
doxycycline. She is also supported with intravenous fluids, analgesics and regular paracetamol.
She continues to be unwell with a raised temperature even after 48 hours of antibiotics. Thus, a
decision is taken to perform a laparoscopy. Usually conservative management is preferred, but when
it is unsuccessful after 24–48 hours laparoscopy is indicated. At the operation, she is found to have a
7-cm enlarged tubo-ovarian abscess and marked inflammation of the uterus and other tube. The
abscess is drained and the patient markedly improves after the surgery. She is found to have
chlamydia on the endocervical swab with anaerobes on the high vaginal swab. She improves over
the course of a few days and is treated with oral antibiotics for 2 weeks. She is counselled regarding
the implications of the infection and is encouraged to contact her present and previous partners for
testing, of whom one tested positive for chlamydia and was subsequently treated. In the future she
would require referral to fertility services early if she failed to conceive. An early scan in pregnancy
is indicated to confirm intrauterine pregnancy, as the risk of an ectopic pregnancy is increased.

SBA QUESTIONS
1 A 32-year-old woman presents at the community reproductive clinic with altered vaginal discharge
and mild abdominal pain. On examination there is a profuse mucopurulant discharge from an
inflamed cervix.
What is the appropriate management? Choose the single best answer.
A Treat with cephalosporin for a presumed gonorrhoeal infection.
B Perform NAAT testing, treat presumptively with wide-spectrum antibiotic.
C Treat with penicillin and test for other STIs.
D Treat with cephalosporin and azithromycin and perform NAAT testing if unresponsive.
E Perform NAAT testing and culture and sensitivity, test for other STIs and treat with
cephalosporin and azithromycin.
ANSWER
E The likely diagnosis is GC and accepted management is to test for other STIs as dual infection is
common. NAAT testing for chlamydia, gonorrhoea or dual infection is performed but culture and
sensitivities are also performed, as increasingly there is resistant infection. Meanwhile treatment
is commenced with cephalosporins and azithromycin, and, of course, contact tracing as for all such
visits. If bimanual examination demonstrates cervical motion and adnexal tenderness, then 2 weeks
of doxycycline and metronidazole should also be given.
2 Which of the following infections can be diagnosed on wet mount microscopy? Choose the single
best answer.
A Candidiasis.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

B Gonorrhoea.
C Trichomoniasis.
D Syphilis.
E BV.
ANSWER
B Each of these pathogens/infections have specific features on microscopy, but some only on Gram
stain. Candida has pseudo-hyphae, Neisseria gonorrhoeae is a gram-negative intracellular
diplococcus, syphilis is caused by a spirochaete bacterium that is visible on dark light microscopy
and BV is associated with Clue cells. Trichomoniasis is caused by a flagellate protozoan,
Trichomonas vaginalis visible on a simple wet mounted swab.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

www.medicalebookpdf.com

CHAPTER 10

Urogynaecology and pelvic floor problems
DOUGLAS TINCELLO

Urinary symptom terminology
Relevant functional anatomy
Clinical assessment of incontinence
Treatment for incontinence
Prolapse
Clinical assessment of prolapse
Treatment for prolapse
Further reading
Self assessment

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
• Understand the anatomy of supporting ligaments and fascia of the female pelvic organs.
• Understand the mechanism of continence in women, and how disorders of this lead to symptoms.
• Appreciate the relationships between anatomical prolapse and functional symptoms, including
urinary, bowel and sexual dysfunction.
• Learn how to assess the patient with incontinence or prolapse by means of history, examination and
relevant investigations.
• Understand the principles of urodynamic testing.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• Understand the principles of treatment of prolapse and incontinence and be able to describe the
effectiveness of each treatment, together with an understanding of potential side-effects and
complications.

Urinary symptom terminology
Urinary symptoms can be divided into those relating to urine storage and those relating to voiding. The
symptom of stress incontinence (leaking with cough, straining, exercise, etc) may be isolated, but most
patients present with mixed incontinence, which is where stress incontinence occurs with frequency,
urgency and urge incontinence. The combination of frequency, urgency and/or urge incontinence is given
the term overactive bladder (OAB). Voiding symptoms are uncommon in women who have not had
previous continence surgery.

Urine storage symptoms
• Frequency: patient considers he/she voids too often by day.
• Nocturia: waking at night one or more times to void.
• Urgency: a sudden compelling desire to pass urine, which is difficult to defer.
• Urge incontinence: involuntary leakage accompanied by or immediately preceded by urgency.
• Stress incontinence: involuntary leakage on effort, exertion, sneezing or coughing.
• Nocturnal enuresis: the loss of urine occurring during sleep.
Urine voiding symptoms
• Slow stream: perception of reduced urine flow.
• Splitting or spraying: where the stream or urine is not a single flow.
• Intermittent stream: urine flow that stops and starts.
• Hesitancy: difficulty in initiating micturition resulting in a delay in the onset of voiding.
• Terminal dribble: a prolonged final part of micturition, when the flow has slowed to a trickle or
dribble.

Relevant functional anatomy
In health the bladder stores, and then voids, urine. This is known as the micturition cycle. Most of the
time, the detrusor muscle of the bladder is relaxed allowing storage of increasing urine volumes with no
increase in pressure. As bladder capacity is reached, sensory signals from stretch receptors in the bladder
wall send the sensation of bladder filling. The sphincter mechanism is closed. As an adult, voluntary
delay of micturition until socially convenient is achieved by cortical inhibition of the spinal voiding
reflex arc. Before voiding begins, this inhibition is removed and the pelvic floor and urethral sphincters
www.medicalebookpdf.com

relax in a coordinated fashion, to allow detrusor contraction and bladder emptying. The detrusor muscle
is innervated by muscarinic cholinergic nerves of the parasympathetic nervous system (causing detrusor
muscle contraction), and the urethral sphincter by noradrenergic neurons of the sympathetic nervous
system (sphincter contraction) and somatic fibres (voluntary contraction and relaxation) from the
pudendal nerves.
In women the urethral sphincter mechanism is a functional system that includes the internal (smooth
muscle) and external (striated muscle) sphincters, the muscles of the pelvic floor and the pubourethral
ligament supporting the urethra within the abdominal cavity. Increases in abdominal pressure are
transmitted equally to the bladder and bladder neck (Figure 10.1A). In the premenopausal woman the
urethral epithelium has a rich blood supply and contributes to continence by acting as a seal.

Stress incontinence
In isolation, the symptom of stress incontinence is a reasonably good predictor of the presence of an
incompetent urethral sphincter. Urethral sphincter weakness in most cases is due to hypermobility, where
the pelvic floor and ligaments cannot retain the urethra in position and it falls through the urogenital hiatus
during increases in abdominal pressure, leading to loss of pressure transmission to the urethra and hence
leakage of urine (Figure 10.1B).
Intrinsic sphincter deficiency (ISD) is less common and occurs where urethral closure pressure is low
without any urethral mobility. ISD is due to weakness of the sphincter muscles and loss of the cushioning
seal effect in the urethra.
Urethral sphincter weakness is associated strongly with a history of vaginal childbirth and various
related risk factors, and with some non-obstetric factors. Obstetric risk factors act by a combination effect
of stretching/damage to the pudendal nerves and overstretching, or even avulsion, of the pelvic floor
muscles from their insertions on the pelvic side wall. Direct muscle damage results in loss of pelvic floor
support and hence urethral hypermobility. Pudendal nerve damage causes both weakening of the pelvic
floor muscles and urethral sphincter. It is now possible to identify levator muscle defects in symptomatic
women by means of magnetic resonance imaging or transperineal/transvaginal ultrasound. Most risk
factors may not be modifiable (with exceptions noted by asterisks below).

Risk factors for stress urinary incontinence
• Multiparity (particularly vaginal births).
• Forceps delivery*.
• Perineal trauma.
• Long labour*.
• Epidural analgesia.
• Birthweight >4 kg.
• Increasing age.
• Postmenopause.
• Obesity studies have shown that significant weight loss among obese women is associated with
major improvements in urinary leakage symptoms.
• Connective tissue disease.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• Chronic cough (e.g. bronchiectasis or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease).
• Doxazocin (alpha-adrenergic antagonist) for hypertension causes relaxation of the urethral
sphincter*.

Detrusor overactivity
Detrusor overactivity (DO) is characterized by involuntary detrusor contractions during the filling phase
of micturition (which can be seen during a urodynamic investigation as described later). Women with DO
will often complain of symptoms of OAB, but may not be incontinent unless the urethral sphincter function
is compromised or the detrusor contractions are of very high pressure amplitude and overcome urethral
resistance (Figure 10.1C).
The aetiology of DO is poorly understood but laboratory studies have identified differences in sensory
and interstitial nerves in the bladder wall of patients compared to controls, and alterations in the
expression of several different neurotransmitters and their receptors.
Fewer risk factors for DO have been identified, of which the most modifiable are obesity and
smoking. All continence surgery carries a risk of 5–10% of new DO.

Figure 10.1 Mechanism of continence. In normal women, the bladder neck is supported above the pelvic
floor and so abdominal pressure increases are transmitted to the bladder neck (A). Loss of bladder neck
support results in descent of the bladder neck and loss of pressure transmission, resulting in leaking when
coughing, straining, etc (stress incontinence) (B). Detrusor overactivity causes increased sensation;
leakage only occurs if the contraction pressure exceeds the pelvic floor and sphincter pressure (C).
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Risk factors for detrusor overactivity
• Childhood bedwetting.
• Obesity.
• Smoking.
• Previous hysterectomy.
• Previous continence surgery.

Clinical assessment of incontinence
A detailed history should be taken to elicit the patient’s presenting symptoms, to identify whether the
patient has only stress incontinence symptoms, only OAB symptoms or mixed symptoms. If there are
mixed symptoms, an assessment should be made as to which predominate. It is useful to record measures
of severity, including: the number of episodes per day of frequency, urgency and leakage; whether
continence pads are needed, and if so how many and what size; whether the patient needs to change her
underclothes or outer clothes because of leakage; and what behaviour changes have been employed.
Commonly, women will have reduced their fluid intake and may limit their social activities to places
where they already know about the position and cleanliness of toilet facilities. Associated symptoms of
prolapse (see later), faecal incontinence symptoms (which patients rarely offer spontaneously) and any
sexual difficulties should be sought, as well as a detailed medical history to identify potential
predisposing factors and to identify any ongoing medical or surgical conditions that may impact on
treatment (including comorbidities that may increase the risk of anaesthesia, or present cautions or
contraindications to drug therapy). Remember to be alert for ‘red flag’ signs suggesting malignancy such
as haematuria, rectal bleeding or significant pain.
Physical examination should include general examination and an abdominal and pelvic examination.
Abdominal examination will identify any surgical scars, evidence of obesity and the presence or absence
of any pelvic mass that may be a factor in urinary frequency. The presence of a large fibroid uterus or
ovarian cyst filling the pelvis is an uncommon finding, but will cause urinary frequency by occupying the
space in the pelvis where the full bladder would normally lie. In such cases, surgical removal of the mass
will be indicated and should improve the urinary symptoms. Pelvic examination of the incontinent woman
ideally should be done in the lithotomy position using a right-angled Sims speculum (see Figure 2.4) to
assess each vaginal wall adequately for associated prolapse (see later). Visible leakage during coughing
or Valsalva manoeuvre should be sought, and an assessment of the patient’s ability to contract and hold the
contraction of her pelvic floor muscles is essential.
All patients should be asked to provide a fresh midstream specimen of urine to exclude overt infection
or asymptomatic bacteriuria. Additional simple investigations include a patient bladder diary (for 3 days
is usually adequate) to record the amount, type and frequency of drinks taken and to record the timing,
frequency and volume of voids (Figure 10.2). This can be a useful exercise for the patient herself to take
note of exactly what she is drinking and her voiding habits. The bladder diary will also allow the patient
to record leakage episodes and urgency. Many clinicians will also ask patients to complete one of a range
of disease-specific quality of life instruments to assess the impact of the patient’s problem and this can be
repeated after treatment to allow collection of outcomes, which is extremely useful for the purpose of
www.medicalebookpdf.com

service audit and for individual clinician appraisal and revalidation. It is possible to obtain an objective
measure of urine leak by conducting a pad test. This is an investigation where the patient wears one or
more preweighed sanitary pads for a variable length of time (between 1 hour in clinic and 24 hours at
home) while performing specific provocation tests (e.g. hand washing, climbing stairs, coughing) or
activities of daily living. The change in weight (g) is a measure of the amount of urine lost (ml). Only the
24-hour home pad test has been shown to be reliable and reproducible, and pad tests have become much
less commonly done in the last 5–10 years.
A pelvic and/or renal tract ultrasound may be indicated if there are symptoms of pelvic pain, clinical
suspicion of a pelvic mass, haematuria, bladder pain or recurrent urinary tract infection. For patients with
mixed symptoms, or those with recurrent problems after previous treatment, it is good practice to discuss
management plans within a multidisciplinary team (MDT) meeting, including a gynaecologist, urologist,
continence nurse, physiotherapist and possibly a medicine for the elderly consultant. Within the UK,
current guidance to best practice is that all women (even primary cases) should be discussed in such a
meeting before initiating surgical treatment of any type.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 10.2 An example of a bladder diary, including columns for recording fluid intake (volume and
amount), voided volume, the amount of leakage and the severity of urgency.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

KEY LEARNING POINTS
• Stress incontinence is typically a result of a weak urethral sphincter, often as a consequence of
childbirth.
• DO causes urgency, frequency and nocturia, but not all patients will have leakage.
• History should include direct questions about faecal leakage or leakage during sexual intercourse.
• Clinical examination should exclude pelvic masses (e.g. fibroid uterus) and assess the patient’s
ability to contract her pelvic floor muscles and the strength of that contraction.
• Women with pain, haematuria or recurrent infections should have the renal tract investigated
radiologically and by cystoscopy.

Treatment for incontinence
Conservative treatment and the role of urodynamic assessment
For many years, most gynaecologists and urologists would perform urodynamic investigation on all
women before initiating treatment. However, it has become clear that urodynamic testing has an
appreciable false-negative rate, carries a small risk of urinary tract infection and does not reliably
identify women at risk of complications after surgery or those who are likely to benefit from drug
treatment. It has also become apparent that a package of conservative treatment will deliver significant
symptom benefit for women with stress incontinence, OAB and mixed incontinence, irrespective of the
underlying urodynamic findings (Figure 10.3).

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 10.3 Flowchart of patient management (based upon UK NICE guidance). (TVT, tension-free
vaginal tape.)
For these reasons, the first-line treatment of choice for women with any form of incontinence, once the
basic investigations have ruled out serious pathology, is for a package of conservative treatment measures
that can be delivered and supervised by a continence nurse, clinical nurse specialist or physiotherapist.
Fluid balance is important; obviously excessive intake (over 2.5 litres) will result in frequency, but
paradoxically, reducing fluid intake (which many patients do) can result in an increase in the sensation of
urgency, due to the more concentrated urine. Women should be encouraged to drink between 1.5 and 2.5
litres of water a day, reducing or avoiding caffeinated beverages and also artificially sweetened or
carbonated (fizzy) drinks, since experimental evidence suggests some artificial sweeteners can increase
detrusor contractility in vitro.

Elements of conservative treatment for urinary incontinence
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• Advice about fluid balance.
• Reduction of caffeine intake.
• Bladder retraining.
• Pelvic floor muscle exercise.

Pelvic floor muscle exercise
In parallel with fluid management, most women are taught ‘pelvic floor exercises’ where they contract
their pelvic floor muscles by direct coaching while being examined vaginally to ensure correct
identification of the levator muscle complex. Without confirmation by direct examination, only 40% of
women will be able to correctly initiate a contraction of the pelvic floor. Individualized exercise
programmes are devised for each patient, to increase both the number of contractions that can be
performed consecutively and also to increase the duration of ‘hold’ of each contraction. This two-pronged
approach is important to build both strength and endurance of the muscle, both of which are essential to
improve continence function. Successful adherence to a programme of pelvic floor exercises can lead to
cure in over 50% of women and improvement in 75% or more. The major barrier to success is the
woman’s willingness to persevere with the exercises over a period of several weeks, in order to achieve
maximum benefit, but the most obvious advantage is that a course of exercise carries no risk of
complications! Pelvic floor exercises work for both stress incontinence and OAB. In the latter case, it is
likely that the benefit is from improving muscle strength to give women the confidence to resist the urge
without fear of leakage, and also by pelvic floor contraction having a reflex inhibition action on detrusor
muscle contraction.

Bladder retraining
For women with OAB or mixed incontinence, pelvic floor muscle training is combined with a form of
bladder drill or bladder retraining. Bladder drill involves re-educating the patient (and her bladder) to
increase the interval between voids, to re-establish normal frequency. For many women with OAB, the
urgency and associated leakage (or fear of leakage) leads them to establish a pattern of voiding whenever
they are aware of bladder filling sensations. An awareness of bladder filling is a normal physiological
signal that occurs once or more than once as the bladder fills, but before full bladder capacity is reached.
Bladder retraining (in conjunction with pelvic floor muscle training) includes teaching the woman about
normal bladder sensation, the rate of urine production (usually 1–2 ml/min) and normal bladder capacity
(350–500 ml), and then encouraging her to practice delaying voiding for several minutes beyond when she
would normally void. It is usual do to this in a stepwise fashion, to push back voiding in 5 or 10 minute
steps, rather than trying to hold for a whole hour. Bladder retraining can be very successful in reducing
frequency and urgency, but like pelvic floor exercises, it requires perseverance and determination on the
part of the patient.
It is important to counsel women about the benefits of weight loss, for those who are overweight or
obese. Obesity is associated with increased risk and severity of stress incontinence, due to the increase in
abdominal pressure, but it is also associated with increased severity of OAB. Several studies have
demonstrated that weight loss leads to improvement in both stress incontinence and OAB, and can result
in cure.

Urodynamic testing

www.medicalebookpdf.com

The purpose of urodynamic testing is to reproduce a micturition cycle (bladder filling and voiding) while
recording abdominal and bladder pressure and attempting to reproduce the patient’s symptoms, to provide
a diagnosis.

Common urodynamic diagnoses
• DO: the presence of a detrusor contraction, with or without sensation, during the filling phase of
urodynamics.
• DO incontinence: leakage from the urethra in association with a detrusor contraction and increase in
bladder pressure.
• Urodynamic stress incontinence: leakage from the urethra in association with a rise in abdominal
pressure (e.g. coughing) without a detrusor contraction (a sign of urethral sphincter weakness).
• Mixed incontinence: the presence of both urodynamic stress incontinence and DO.
A fine pressure catheter is placed in the bladder through the urethra and a second catheter in the
rectum, and the bladder is filled with warm saline while pressure recordings are made with the patient
sitting on a commode that records leakage (Figure 10.4A). The pressure generated by any contraction of
the detrusor can be inferred by subtraction (bladder pressure − abdominal pressure = detrusor pressure).
During filling the patient is asked to declare the onset of bladder filling sensation (usually around 150 ml
volume), a strong desire to void (around 350 ml and the onset of urgency (up to 500 ml, depending on
bladder capacity) (Figure 10.4B). When urgency is reported (and functional bladder capacity is reached)
filling is stopped and the patient performs various actions to provoke leakage and/or detrusor contractions
(e.g. coughing, star jumps, listening to running water), before voiding while the pressure catheters remain
in place. A urodynamic test will provide evidence of urethral sphincter weakness (Figure 10.4B) or DO
(Figure 10.4C), as well as identifying normal or abnormal voiding function.
Urodynamic testing is reserved for patients who fail to improve with conservative measures, and also
for patients with recurrent symptoms or those with complex histories or who have undergone previous
surgery for incontinence or prolapse (Figure 10.4). For women with OAB, many clinicians will initiate
drug treatment before urodynamic testing (see below) and only perform the investigation when
considering second-line interventions.
However, the relationship between urinary symptoms and urodynamic diagnoses is not strong.
Although the symptom of stress incontinence in isolation is a good predictor of identifying urethral
sphincter weakness on urodynamic testing, OAB symptoms are much less reliably associated with
evidence of DO on testing (Figure 10.5). Evidence is lacking to show that urodynamic testing improves
the outcome of surgery, reliably predicts postoperative voiding dysfunction or is of benefit in women with
the symptom of stress incontinence alone. For women with mixed incontinence or OAB, it remains good
practice to perform urodynamic testing before considering second-line treatments, after oral medication
and conservative measures have failed.

KEY LEARNING POINTS
• Conservative treatment with fluid advice, pelvic floor exercises and bladder retraining is the first
line for all patients with incontinence or OAB and ideally should be delivered in primary care.
• Patient motivation is important for success of conservative treatment.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• Urodynamic investigation is not always necessary before commencing drug treatment or before
surgery in women complaining only of stress incontinence.
• A urodynamic assessment should be done for women who fail to respond to anticholinergic
medication or in women with mixed symptoms for whom surgery is being considered.

Medical treatment
Medical treatments for urinary incontinence are primarily aimed at treatment of OAB symptoms and DO.
Because the parasympathetic nerves stimulate the detrusor muscle to contract, anticholinergic medications
have been the mainstay of medical treatment for many years. There is a wide range of different
compounds and preparations available. The main site of action of anticholinergic drugs is the motor endplate of the neuromuscular junction, where they antagonize the action of acetylcholine at the muscarinic
receptors and inhibit detrusor contraction. In the last 5 years, it has become apparent that acetylcholine is
also an important neurotransmitter in the afferent, sensory pathways in the bladder and thus the drugs also
have a direct effect in reducing the perceived sensations of bladder filling by inhibiting receptor-mediated
afferent signals.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 10.4 A urodynamic investigation (cystometry) records bladder pressure and abdominal pressure
(usually via a rectal pressure catheter), and calculates detrusor pressure by subtraction (A). During
filling, the patient is asked to report the occurrence of first desire to void (usually about 150 ml), strong
desire and urgency (at functional bladder capacity) (B). With urodynamic stress incontinence, leakage is
seen with increases in abdominal pressure (e.g. coughing) with no change in detrusor pressure (B). With
detrusor overactivity, detrusor contractions are seen during the filling phase (C). These may or may not
result in leakage, but normally will be associated with increased sensation.

Figure 10.5 The relationship between symptoms and urodynamic diagnosis.

Anticholinergic medications
• Oxybutynin: 2.5–5 mg up to three times daily; first-choice medication recommended by the UK
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE); modified release preparation 5 mg once
daily; increase weekly by 5 mg up to 20 mg daily.
• Propiverine: 15 mg one to three times daily.
• Trospium: 20 mg twice daily.
• Tolterodine: 2 mg twice daily; reduced to 1 mg in hepatic impairment; modified release preparation
4 mg once daily.
• Fesoterodine: 4 mg once daily, maximum 8 mg once daily (fesoterodine is related to tolterodine).
• Solifenacin: 5 mg once daily; can be increased to 10 mg once daily.
• Darifenacin: 7.5 mg once daily.
All anticholinergic drugs have similar efficacy, with published randomized studies demonstrating a
decrease in urgency and incontinence episodes in the range of 1–2 per day, compared with placebo. The
side-effect profile is similar across all drugs, with dry mouth, constipation and blurred vision being the
most common.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Mirabegron is a more recently developed medication for OAB, which is a beta 3-adrenergic agonist.
Mirabegron acts upon the sympathetic neurones innervating the bladder, to enhance relaxation of the
detrusor. Therefore it is acting more on the storage function of the bladder than do anticholinergic
medications, which act by suppressing voiding. Mirabegron can be used simultaneously with an
anticholinergic drug.
In postmenopausal women topical vaginal oestrogen for 3 months can provide dramatic improvement
in bladder sensation and associated urgency.
Duloxetine is used very occasionally for incontinence. It is a combined serotonin and noradrenaline
reuptake inhibitor, and has a dual licence for the treatment of depression in higher doses. Duloxetine acts
at the micturition centre in the sacral spinal cord to increase the sympathetic nerve output to the urethral
sphincter and increase sphincter tone. Randomized trials have shown a 50% improvement or more in
leakage symptoms in over one-half of the patients treated. However, the side-effects, including nausea,
cause many women to stop treatment.

Surgical treatment
Stress incontinence
For women with stress incontinence (based on a history of only stress leakage or on urodynamic
assessment) surgery is a highly effective option for treatment. The most effective and thus the first-choice
procedures are either a synthetic midurethral tape procedure (Figure 10.6) or a Burch colposuspension
(Figure 10.7). In much of the UK, Europe and the USA, midurethral tape procedures almost entirely
replaced colposuspension as primary treatment during the 1990s and later, although our developing
understanding of potential complications may lead to a return to colposuspension. Certainly, in settings
where synthetic tapes are not available, colposuspension remains a safe and effective operation.

Figure 10.6 The position of tension-free vaginal (TVT) and transobturator (TOT) midurethral tapes. The
TVT lies under the midurethra and in the retropubic space between the pelvis and bladder. The
introducing trocars pass through the urogenital diaphragm and the rectus sheath. The TOT lies in a more
horizontal position under the midurethra and exits through the obturator foramen, piercing the obturator
muscle and the adductor longus tendon in the thigh.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 10.7 A sketch of a colposuspension through a Pfannenstiel incision. The patient’s head is at the
bottom of the picture, and interrupted sutures are being placed in the paravaginal fascia at the level of the
bladder neck through the pectineal ligament on the posterior surface of the superior pubic ramus.
There are now several variations of midurethral tapes available, but the underlying principle is the
same. A permanent, non-absorbable mesh of polypropylene woven into a tape approximately 1 cm wide
is placed through a small vaginal incision under the midurethra and into a U shape behind the pubic
symphysis, via two small suprapubic incisions (a retropubic placement), or into a hammock shape behind
the inferior pubic rami and through the obturator foramen, via a small incision in each groin (a
transobturator placement) (Figure 10.6). The midurethral tapes have a cure rate for stress incontinence of
80–85%, and this high success rate persists in the long term (10 years or more). Complications specific to
midurethral tapes relate to the non-absorbable polypropylene they are manufactured from. There is a low
rate of the tape interfering with vaginal wound healing, leading to exposure of the central portion of tape,
or of later erosion of the tape through the vaginal skin at other places along its length.
Common operative complications include:
• Voiding difficulty (usually short term) in 2–5%.
• Bladder perforation during the procedure (2–5%).
• Onset of new OAB symptoms after surgery (5%).
Burch colposuspension was the primary procedure for stress incontinence for many years before the
midurethral tapes were developed. At colposuspension, the retropubic space is opened via a Pfannenstiel
incision in the abdomen, and the bladder reflected medially on each side to allow the placement of two or
three sutures (either absorbable or permanent) into the paravaginal fascia on each side at the level of the
bladder neck (Figure 10.7). These sutures are placed through the pectineal ligament on the pubic ramus
on the same side, and then tied to provide support to the bladder neck and prevent descent during
coughing or straining. The cure rate for incontinence is the same as for midurethral tapes (80–85%), and
complications are similar.
Colposuspension carries a long-term risk of developing posterior vaginal prolapse (5–10%) due to
lifting of the anterior vaginal wall.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

A third option for surgery is periurethral injections of material that bulk up the bladder neck and coat
the urethral mucosa to prevent leakage. Three products are widely available (Macroplastique,
Durasphere and Bulkamid). These are all synthetic polymer materials, either as microscopic beads or
viscous liquid. The procedure is performed under local anaesthetic and is available for women deemed
too medically unfit or frail for a formal anaesthetic, or for women with residual leakage after a tape or
colposuspension (Figure 10.8). Cure rates after these procedures are of the order of 60–80% but longerterm cure is less effective, so some patients require two or more treatments. High-quality data from
randomized trials of these products are lacking, so most clinicians will use these as third-line or ‘rescue’
therapy, although in some settings women are choosing injectables as first-line treatment in view of the
possibility of being treated in an ‘office’ setting.

Figure 10.8 Cystoscope images showing an open bladder neck (A) before injection and a closed bladder
neck after injection (B).

Detrusor overactivity
For DO, a surgical option may be considered as second-line treatment (Figure 10.3). The neurotoxin
botulinum toxin A (marketed as Botox or Dysport) has been shown in recent randomized trials to be a
highly effective treatment. Botulinum toxin is a long-acting molecule that prevents the release of
neurotransmitter vesicles from the motor end-plate and causes a flaccid paralysis in the treated muscle. A
single intramuscular injection can last for 3–6 months. Botulinum toxin is administered via a flexible or
rigid cystoscope and injected in multiple sites across the dome of the bladder, to abolish the involuntary
detrusor contractions that cause symptoms. Reduction of urgency and leakage episodes of over 50–80%
have been reported, and continence rates in excess of 40%. The major drawback of this treatment is a
voiding difficulty rate of 8–15% which, if it occurs, can persist for the duration of treatment effect and be
troublesome for the patient to manage. However, many patients are able to self-catheterize with little
difficulty and still find that this gives them a high degree of social independence, compared to before
treatment.
Sacral neuromodulation is also an effective surgical management option.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

KEY LEARNING POINTS
• Surgery for stress incontinence is highly effective with cure rates of 85% or higher.
• Midurethral tapes and colposuspension are equally effective, but tape surgery is more costeffective due to the short hospital stay and rapid return to normal activities.
• Patients should be warned of the risk of voiding dysfunction, bladder injury and new OAB
symptoms after surgery.
• Mesh-related complications are uncommon after midurethral tape surgery but can be difficult to
treat; patients should be fully informed of the risks, and of the potential for further surgery to deal
with these complications.
• Botulinum toxin and sacral neuromodulation are highly effective second-line treatments for
detrusor overactivity.

Prolapse
Symptoms from pelvic organ prolapse
Pelvic organ prolapse can cause symptoms directly due to the prolapsed organ or indirectly due to organ
dysfunction secondary to displacement from the anatomical position. Proplase symptoms include a
sensation of vaginal bulge, heaviness or a visible protrusion at or beyond the introitus. Patients may also
describe lower abdominal or back pain, or a dragging discomfort relieved by lying or sitting.
Indirect symptoms will depend on which other organs are involved in the prolapse but may include
difficulty in voiding urine or emptying the bowel (termed obstructive defaecation), and sensations of
incomplete emptying of bladder or rectum. Patients may have to support or reduce the prolapse with their
fingers to be able to void or evacuate stool completely (termed digitation, distinct from manual
evacuation of the rectum). Urinary or faecal incontinence may also be present. It is important to ask about
sexual activity, even in the older patient, and to enquire about difficulty achieving penetration, pain or
discomfort during intercourse and loss of sensation and difficulty achieving orgasm due to vaginal or
introital laxity.
Patients may experience vaginal bleeding from a prolapse that is external and becomes ulcerated or
abraded, but in women with a uterus, one must remember to exclude endometrial carcinoma by biopsy and
ultrasound.
Risk factors predisposing to prolapse are very much similar to those predisposing to stress
incontinence. Research has shown the pudendal nerves to be damaged after childbirth, with increased
nerve conduction times, and ultrasound studies of the pelvic anatomy of women with prolapse have
demonstrated thinning or avulsion of the puborectalis muscle from its insertion on the pubic ramus, on
either one or both sides in a high proportion of cases.

Relevant anatomy
Uterovaginal prolapse is caused by failure of the interaction between the levator ani muscles and the
ligaments and fascia that support the pelvic organs. For a detailed description of the relationships and
function of these structures, see the review by Wei & De Lancey in Further reading. The levator ani
www.medicalebookpdf.com

muscles are puborectalis, pubococcygeus and iliococcygeus. They are attached on each side of the pelvic
side wall from the pubic ramus anteriorly (pubococcygeus), over the obturator internus fascia to the
ischial spine to form a bowl-shaped muscle filling the pelvic outlet and supporting the pelvic organs (see
Chapter 1, The development and anatomy of the female sexual organs and pelvis). There is a gap between
the fibres of the puborectalis on each side to allow passage of the urethra, vagina and rectum, called the
urogenital hiatus. The levator muscles support the pelvic organs and prevent excessive loading of the
ligaments and fascia.
There are three levels of supporting ligaments and fascia, which work together to provide a global and
dynamic system to support the uterus, vagina and associated organs (Figure 10.9). Level 1 (apical)
support is provided by the uterosacral ligaments, which attach the cervix to the sacrum. Obviously,
support at this level is crucial in contributing to support of the vaginal walls that are attached to the cervix
(Figure 10.10A). Defects in level 1 support can be seen on examination by the descent of the uterus
within the vagina. Level 1 support remains critical even after hysterectomy, so it is important during that
procedure to reattach the uterosacral ligaments to the vaginal vault. In women who have previously
undergone hysterectomy, level 1 support defects will manifest as vaginal vault prolapse (Figure 10.10B).
Level 2 support is provided by the fascia that surrounds the vagina, both anteriorly and posteriorly,
lying between the vagina and the bladder (pubocervical fascia) or rectum (rectovaginal fascia). These
fascial sheets fuse together at the vaginal edge and then are attached to the pelvic side wall, fusing to the
fascia overlying obturator internus. These fascial attachments result in the vagina lying as a flattened tube
(laterally) at rest. Defects in the fascia providing level 2 support will lead to prolapse of the vaginal wall
into the vaginal lumen (causing anterior or posterior vaginal prolapse) (Figure 10.10C, D). The bladder
or rectum will prolapse behind the vaginal wall due to the fascial attachment to it. On examination, the
affected vaginal wall will be seen bulging into the vagina.
Level 3 support is provided by the fascia of the posterior vagina, which is attached at its caudal end to
the perineal body. The perineal body is a dense connective tissue mass underneath the lower third of the
posterior vaginal wall and is the insertion of the posterior vaginal fascia, fibres of levator ani and the
transverse perineal muscles. It is the perineal body that is torn or cut (by episiotomy) during childbirth.
Defects of the perineal body usually cause the development of lower posterior vaginal wall prolapse, but
the loss of the perineal body increases the size of vaginal opening and therefore predisposes to anterior
vaginal prolapse as well (Figure 10.10C, D).

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 10.9 Fascial supports of the pelvic organs. Level 1 support is provided by the uterosacral
ligaments, suspending the uterus and attached vaginal vault. Level 2 (midvagina) support is provided by
the fascia lying between the vagina and the bladder or rectum that fuses laterally and runs to attach on the
pelvic side wall. Level 3 support is provided by the perineal body, which has the posterior vaginal fascia
fused to its upper surface.

KEY LEARNING POINTS
• The levator ani muscles (puborectalis, pubococcygeus and iliococcygeus) support the pelvic
organs and relieve excessive pressure from the ligaments and fascia.
• The uterosacral ligaments provide essential apical support (level 1 support).
• Vaginal fascia supports the vagina (level 2 support).
• The perineal body is very important in supporting the lower vagina (level 3 support).
• All the structures provide a dynamic and integrated support to the pelvic organs.

Clinical assessment of prolapse
The history should elicit the presenting symptom(s) and severity, and include questions to ascertain if the
patient has any coexisting urinary, faecal or sexual symptoms as discussed above for the incontinent
www.medicalebookpdf.com

patient. One should be sensitive to the emotional aspect of the problem, but specific questions should be
asked about sexual discomfort and difficulty achieving orgasm. For women who are not sexually active, it
should be discussed whether this is due to the prolapse symptoms or other personal or social issues (e.g.
health of the partner). For some women, intercourse is avoided because of anxieties or embarrassment
over the appearance of the genitalia and a loss of perceived attractiveness.
Clinical examination should ideally be done in the lithotomy position with a Sims speculum (see
Chapter 2, Gynaecological history, examination and investigations, Figure 2.4). This allows retraction of
the anterior and posterior vaginal wall in turn, to allow full assessment of the degree of prolapse and to
assess how much descent of the cervix and uterus is present. Prolapse is described in three stages of
descent, and note should be made of whether it occurs at patient straining or at rest and whether traction
has been applied:

www.medicalebookpdf.com

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 10.10 Development of prolapse. The pelvic floor and ligaments work together to provide support
against increases in abdominal pressure (A). Prolapse is almost invariably associated with perineal body
damage causing an enlarged vaginal opening. Prolapse can then occur if the apical (level 1) support is
lost (B), or if the pelvic floor muscles are ineffective (C) or directly as a result of perineal body
deficiency (D). Often, a combination of factors is at work.
• Stage I where the prolapse does not reach the hymen.
• Stage II where the prolapse reaches the hymen.
• Stage III when the prolapse is mostly or wholly outside the hymen. When the uterus prolapses wholly
outside this is termed procidentia.
In women who have undergone hysterectomy, the vaginal vault can prolapse (Figure 10.10B). Vaginal
prolapse of the anterior vagina (the anterior compartment) is also known as cystocele in the upper half or
urethrocele in the lower half. Posterior vaginal prolapse (the posterior compartment) is also known as
enterocele in the upper third, or rectocele below this (Figure 10.10D). Vaginal prolapse is formally
staged using the methods mentioned above, but the most important assessment is whether the vaginal
prolapse reaches to, or beyond, the hymen. Finally, it is important to assess whether the perineal body is
intact or has become attenuated, resulting in an enlarged vaginal opening.
For women with symptoms of pressure or vaginal bulge only, there is rarely a need to arrange any
investigations, other than those relating to anaesthetic preassessment (see Chapter 17, Gynaecological
surgery and therapeutics). In view of the complex relationship between prolapse and bladder or bowel
functions, if women have additional indirect symptoms, then it is prudent to arrange urodynamic
assessment or functional tests of the lower bowel, which may include endoanal ultrasound to check for
anal a sphincter defects, rectal manometry, flexible sigmoidoscopy and a defaecating proctogram. Ideally,
such patients should be reviewed with the completed investigations in a MDT meeting including a
gynaecologist, colorectal surgeon, continence nurse and physiotherapist.

Treatment for prolapse
Conservative treatment
Conservative treatment for prolapse includes pelvic floor muscle exercises and the use of supportive
vaginal pessaries. For women with urinary or bowel symptoms as well, conservative treatment for these
symptoms can be commenced at the same time as for the prolapse. A course of supervised pelvic floor
exercises will reduce the symptoms of prolapse and for women who are keen to avoid surgical treatment,
this can be an effective first step, although there is less evidence that pelvic floor exercise will reduce the
anatomical extent of the prolapse and it is unlikely to be helpful for women whose prolapse is beyond the
vaginal introitus.
An alternative to this is to insert a vaginal support pessary to reduce the prolapse, which leads to
resolution of many of the symptoms. Pessary use can be very effective at relieving symptoms and has the
advantage of avoiding surgery and the associated risks, which can be extremely useful in the medically
unfit and elderly. A range of shapes of pessary is available (Figure 10.11). Ring pessaries are usually
tried first, but an intact perineal body is necessary for these to be retained. Shelf pessaries, Gelhorn
pessaries and others are useful for women with deficient perineal bodies. It is usual practice to replace a
pessary every 6 months and to examine the patient for signs of vaginal ulceration, although this frequency
www.medicalebookpdf.com

is traditional and not based on any evidence. Complications are uncommon and usually minor (bleeding,
discharge), although rarely the pessary can become incarcerated, requiring general anaesthesia to remove,
and rare cases of rectovaginal or vesicovaginal fistula formation have been reported. Sexual intercourse
remains theoretically possible with a well-placed ring pessary, but not with the others, so would not
generally be suitable for women who are sexually active. Motivated patients can be taught to insert and
remove their own pessaries if they do wish to remain sexually active.

Figure 10.11 Vaginal support pessaries.

Surgery for pelvic organ prolapse
Surgical treatment for prolapse is common, and can be offered if conservative treatments have failed or if
the patient chooses surgery from the outset. There are a wide range of specific procedures that are
described further in Chapter 17, Gynaecological surgery and therapeutics. The procedure chosen depends
on which compartment is affected, whether the woman wishes to retain her uterus and whether the vaginal
or abdominal route of surgery is chosen. The essential principles of prolapse surgery apply for all
procedures. Prolapse surgery is performed through the vagina to restore the ligamentous tissue supports to
the apex, anterior and posterior vagina (anterior repair, posterior repair) and repair of the perineal body.
The vaginal route can also be used for posthysterectomy vault prolapse, attaching the vaginal vault to the
right sacrospinous ligament with non-absorbable or slowly absorbable sutures, but here an abdominal
approach to perform a sacrocolpopexy is an option that will provide excellent, durable long-term cure.
The relative merits of abdominal compared to vaginal surgery and the usual recovery times are discussed
in Chapter 17, Gynaecological surgery and therapeutics. In the last 3–5 years, there has been an increasing
number of women wishing to avoid hysterectomy during prolapse surgery, so both sacrospinous fixation
and sacrocolpopexy can be performed by attaching a mesh or sutures to the cervix rather than the vaginal
vault.

Principles of prolapse surgery
• Remove/reduce the vaginal bulge.
• Restore the ligament/tissue supports to the apex, anterior and posterior vagina.
• Replace associated organs in their correct positions.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• Retain sufficient vaginal length and width to allow intercourse.
• Restore the perineal body.
• Correct or prevent urinary incontinence.
• Correct or prevent faecal incontinence.
• Correct obstructed defaecation.
Vaginal repair using mesh improves the anatomical outcome and reduces the risk of recurrent prolapse.
However, the available long-term data do not demonstrate a difference in symptom relief between
standard repair and mesh repair. Mesh repair carries the risk of later erosion and need for removal, which
is challenging surgery. Therefore, many surgeons will only consider mesh repair for women with
recurrent vaginal prolapse, and only proceed after careful and full counselling of the woman about the
relative benefits and potential risks of surgery.

KEY LEARNING POINTS
• Uterovaginal prolapse causes troublesome symptoms but is not life threatening.
• A course of pelvic floor exercises can reduce symptoms and may reduce prolapse progression in
women with mild/moderate prolapse.
• Vaginal pessaries are a useful conservative treatment but do not suit all women.
• Surgery for prolapse is effective, but has a recurrence rate of about 5%.
• It is not essential to perform hysterectomy for prolapse.
• Mesh repairs for prolapse give a better anatomical cure, but there is no convincing evidence that
symptom relief is different from standard surgery.
• Mesh complications are common and can be extremely difficult to manage.

Further reading
Dmochowski RR, Blaivas JM, Gormley EA, et al. (2010). Update of AUA guideline on the surgical
management of female stress urinary incontinence. J Urol 183:1906–14.
Smith A, Bevan D, Douglas HR, James D (2013). Management of urinary incontinence in women:
summary of updated NICE guidance. BMJ 347:f5170. doi: 10.1136/bmj.f5170.:f5170.
Wei JT, De Lancey JO (2004). Functional anatomy of the pelvic floor and lower urinary tract. Clin
Obstet Gynecol 47:3–17.

Self assessment
CASE HISTORY
www.medicalebookpdf.com

A 47-year-old patient, who is a lawyer, presents to clinic with symptoms of leaking urine on
coughing, sneezing and exercise, and when she has the urge to pass urine.
A Describe the important parts of the history to be taken.
B Describe the investigations required.
C Describe the best treatment.
ANSWERS
A Take a standard gynaecological history first, noting any severe menstrual symptoms (in case a
hysterectomy should be considered), AUB or menopause. Note number and mode of deliveries.
Note any abdominal surgery. When taking the history have a mind to both the effect on the patient’s
life and indications for, or against, medical or surgical treatment.
Next a detailed urogynecological history is required as discussed in this chapter.
The patient reveals on direct questions that she has no menstrual problems, has had three
vaginal deliveries and no abdominal surgery. She is fit and not overweight and exercises
regularly. She drinks a normal volume of fluids, has a few caffeinated drinks per day. She avoids
red wine as it makes her bladder worse.
She notes leakage on exercise, coughing and sneezing and on intercourse. She is getting some
burning on passing urine in the last few weeks. She has an urge to pass urine when her bladder is
not very full, and the urge is very strong. She leaks urine when this happens. She passes urine
about eight times a day and once at night.
On examination she has a deficient perineum, a moderate cystocele and minimal rectocele. She
has poor pelvic tone.
B A midstream urine sample (MSU) should be taken as the symptoms are quite new. Urodynamics
are not the first line of treatment because their relation to detruser instability is not good.
C The first-line of management is supervised pelvic floor exercises. If the MSU shows infection
antibiotics should be prescribed.

EMQ
A Urodynamic assessment.
B Urgent flexible cystoscopy.
C Renal tract ultrasound.
D Insertion of midurethral tape.
E Immediate release oyxbutynin.
F Topical oestrogen.
G Oral antibiotics.
H Botulinum toxin injection.
I Duloxetine.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

For each description below, choose the SINGLE most appropriate answer from the above list of
options. Each option may be used once, more than once or not at all.
1 Immediate management of a 73-year-old woman with frequency, urgency and haematuria.
2 Management of a 38-year-old woman with symptoms of only stress incontinence who has
completed a course of pelvic floor exercises without improvement.
3 Should be performed after failed conservative and/or medical management before second-line
treatments for incontinence.
4 First-line drug treatment for OAB.
ANSWERS
1B Because of the haematuria, cystoscopy is required to exclude a malignancy.
2D It is reasonable to insert a midurethral tape without further investigations in this situation,
because there are no symptoms of mixed incontinence.
3A Urodynamic assessment will exclude a picture of mixed incontinence, which is necessary before
more invasive treatment.
4E Immediate release oxybutynin will effectively treat overactive bladder symptoms and no further
investigations are required before treatment.

SBA QUESTIONS
1 A 45 year old woman attends outpatients complaining of a 3-year history of stress incontinence,
urgency and urge incontinence. She leaks urine about four times a day, has to wear sanitary pads
all the time and rarely travels due to the urgency and need to pass urine 8 or 9 times during the day.
Examination reveals her to be of normal BMI, with a weak pelvic floor muscle strength.
What would be the recommended first line of management? Choose the single best answer.
A Commence the patient on an oral anticholinergic medication for 8 weeks.
B Arrange urodynamic assessment to define the underlying cause of her problems.
C Arrange a 6–8 week course of supervised pelvic floor exercises and bladder retraining.
D Admit the patient for a cystoscopy.
E Test the urine for infection and treat with antibiotics.
ANSWER
C Pelvic floor strengthening exercises will improve up to 50% of stress incontinence problems and
may avoid the need to treat urge incontinence with anticholinergics. Urodynamics are not
necessary before first-line treatment. Although a urinary tract infection must be excluded before
investigations or treatment, it is not a first-line investigation and does not fit with the symptoms or
signs. No bladder abnormality is expected here to necessitate a cystoscopy.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

2 A 73-year-old woman attends clinic with a large prolapse. She underwent abdominal hysterectomy
at the age of 42 for heavy periods, and later required a second laparotomy for a large left-sided
ovarian cyst, which was complicated by dense abdominal adhesions. She has no other significant
history. On examination she has a vaginal vault prolapse that extends beyond the introitus and also
has a very deficient perineum with a large vaginal opening. She is married and wishes to be able
to resume intercourse.
What is the best option for treatment for this patient? Choose the single best answer.
A Insertion of a vaginal pessary.
B Colpocleisis.
C Abdominal sacrocolpopexy.
D Vaginal repair with sacrospinous fixation.
E Antero-posterior repair.
ANSWER
D Abdominal surgery must be avoided in this woman because of the adhesions. A vaginal pessary
will not help her to resume intercourse. Repair of the vaginal walls will not help her deficient
perineum or vault prolapse. Colpocleisis is the closure of the vagina, performed in older women
who do not wish to have intercourse, to effectively treat prolapse.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

www.medicalebookpdf.com

CHAPTER 11

Benign conditions of the ovary and pelvis
T JUSTIN CLARK

Benign diseases of the ovary
Endometriosis
Chronic pelvic pain
Further reading
Self assessment

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
• Describe the types of benign ovarian cysts, their symptoms, diagnosis and treatment.
• Describe the presentation and management of acute pelvic pain.
• Understand the pathology of endometriosis and recognize its involvement in chronic pelvic pain
and subfertility.
• Understand how to diagnose and treat endometriosis.
• List potential causes for chronic pelvic pain (CPP).
• Appreciate the multifactorial nature of CPP and potential management options.

Benign diseases of the ovary
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Benign ovarian tumours are listed in Table 11.1. Most benign ovarian tumours will be diagnosed
following investigation of women complaining of acute pelvic pain or chronic pelvic pain (CPP), or
noticing the presence of an abdominal mass. They may also be found incidentally during a gynaecological
examination or pelvic ultrasound scan (USS). The differential diagnosis of a pelvic mass includes
tumours of adjacent structures (uterus, bladder and bowel) and pregnancy.
The presentation with the different types of benign ovarian tumours varies with age. Functional cysts
are common in young girls, adolescents and women in their reproductive years. Germ cell tumours occur
more commonly in young women, whereas benign epithelial tumours are more prevalent in older and
postmenopausal women.

The differential diagnosis of a pelvic mass
• Gynaecological: benign or malignant ovarian cyst; torsion; para-ovarian cyst; ectopic pregnancy;
hydrosalpinx; pyosalpinx; tubo-ovarian abscess; tubal malignancy; pregnancy; fibroids; uterine
malignancy.
• Gastrointestinal: small or large bowel obstruction; diverticular/appendicular abscess;
intussusception; malignancy.
• Urological: hydronephrosis; pelvic kidney; renal/bladder malignancy.
• Other: pelvic lymphocele; peritoneal cyst; psoas muscle abscess; lymphoma; neuroblastoma; aortic
aneurism.

Table 11.1 Types of benign ovarian cyst
Functional

Follicular cyst
Corpus luteal cyst
Theca luteal cyst

Inflammatory

Tubo-ovarian abscess
Endometrioma

Germ cell

Benign teratoma (dermoid cyst)

Epithelial

Serous cystadenoma
Mucinous cystadenoma
Brenner tumour

Sex cord stromal

Fibroma
Thecoma

Diagnosis may be made by symptoms of pelvic discomfort or pressure on the bowel or bladder. Acute
pain may represent torsion of a cyst, rupture or haemorrhage into it. Abdominal and bimanual pelvic
examination may elicit a pelvic/abdominal mass that may be tender and will be separate from the uterus.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Ovarian torsion
• Torsion of an ovary refers to a situation where there is rotation of the vascular pedicle supplying the
ovary, which compresses and cuts its blood supply. Torsion is more likely with enlargement of the
ovary as is seen in the presence of an ovarian cyst. Up to 15% of dermoid cysts present acutely with
torsion.
• Presenting symptoms are usually acute onset of lower abdominal pain associated with nausea and
vomiting. Pelvic USS with Doppler measurement of blood flow may be useful in the diagnosis, to
confirm the presence of a cyst and comment on blood flow to the ovary. Torsion of a normal ovary is
very unlikely.
• Emergency surgical treatment to untwist the ovary and its attached pedicle is required to restore
blood flow, and the ovarian cyst should then be removed. However, if this complication is not
recognized within a few hours of presentation, infarction and gangrene may result, necessitating
removal of the necrotic ovary. Decision making to operate should be based on clinical findings, with
transvaginal ultrasound scan (TVUSS) support.
The first-line investigation for women with a suspected pelvic mass or pelvic pain is an USS. A
TVUSS has better resolution for pelvic masses. A transabdominal ultrasound scan (TAUSS) is indicated
in women who have never been sexually active, or in combinations with a TVUSS where large ovarian
masses extending beyond the pelvis and into the abdomen are present. Additional imaging with computed
tomography (CT) scanning or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can further characterize the nature of
ovarian cysts, especially where they are thought to be potentially malignant. Serological tumour markers
should also be taken to help determine the type of ovarian cyst and differentiate between a benign and
malignant neoplasm (Table 11.2 and Chapter 14, Malignant disease of the ovary). A pregnancy test should
be performed to exclude pregnancy. Inflammatory markers, such as C-reactive protein (CRP) and white
cell count (WCC), are important if the differential diagnosis includes appendicitis or a tubo-ovarian
abscess.

Table 11.2 Tumour markers used in the investigation and follow-up of ovarian cysts

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Functional ovarian cysts
This group of ovarian cysts includes follicular, corpus luteal and theca luteal cysts. The risk of
developing functional cysts is reduced by the use of the combined oral contraceptive pill (COCP). Little
is known about their aetiology, but diagnosis is made when the cyst measures more than 3 cm (normal
ovulatory follicles measure up to 2.5 cm). They rarely grow larger than 10 cm and appear as simple
unilocular cysts on ultrasound (Figure 11.1A). Management depends on symptoms: if asymptomatic, the
patient can be reassured and a repeat USS performed to check resolution or non-enlargement and
thereafter the patient can be discharged; if symptomatic, she can be booked for laparoscopic cystectomy if
necessary.
Corpus luteal cysts occur following ovulation and may present with pain due to rupture or
haemorrhage, typically late in the menstrual cycle (Figure 11.1B). Treatment is expectant, with analgesia.
Occasionally, surgery may be necessary if there has been significant bleeding to wash out the pelvis and
perform an ovarian cystectomy.
Theca luteal cysts are associated with pregnancy, particularly multiple pregnancy, and are often
diagnosed incidentally at routine ultrasound. They are often bilateral. Most resolve spontaneously during
pregnancy.
eResource 11.1
Ovarian cysts
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv11.1.php

Inflammatory ovarian cysts
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Inflammatory ovarian cysts are usually associated with pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) (see Chapter 9,
Genitourinary problems), and are most common in young women. The inflammatory mass may involve the
tube, ovary and bowel and can be described on imaging as a mass or an abscess. Occasionally, the tuboovarian mass can develop from other infective causes, for example appendicitis or diverticular disease.
Diagnosis is similar to that for PID: inflammatory markers are helpful and treatment may include
antibiotics, surgical drainage or excision. Definitive surgery is usually deferred until after the acute
infection has resolved, due to the risks of perioperative systemic infection and bleeding from handling
acutely inflamed and infected tissue.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 11.1 Transvaginal ultrasound scan. A: Simple ovarian cyst; B: corpus luteum cyst; C: dermoid
cyst.
Patients may present with endometriomas, often known as ‘chocolate cysts’ due to the presence of
altered blood within the ovary. They have a characteristic ‘ground glass’ appearance on USS. Further
management of endometriosis is discussed in the next section.

Germ cell tumours
These are the most common ovarian tumours in young women aged 20–40 years, accounting for more than
50% of ovarian tumours in this age group with a peak incidence in the early 20s. The most common form
of benign germ cell tumour is the mature dermoid cyst (cystic teratoma), which contains fully
differentiated tissue types derived from all three embryonic germ cell layers (mesenchymal, epithelial and
stroma). Hair, teeth, fat, skin, muscle, cartilage, bone and endocrine tissue are frequently present. Up to
10% of dermoid cysts are bilateral. The risk of malignant transformation is rare (<2%), usually occurring
in women over 40 years. Diagnosis is usually confirmed with a pelvic USS (Figure 11.1C) and because
of the high fat content present in dermoid cysts, MRI may also be useful where there is uncertainty. In
general, ovarian cystectomy is indicated because spontaneous resolution is unlikely. Surgery is especially
indicated if the dermoid cyst is symptomatic (Figure 11.2), is more than 5 cm in diameter or is enlarging.
Cystectomy will prevent ovarian torsion and provide tissue for histological analysis.

Epithelial tumours
Benign epithelial tumours increase in frequency with age and are most common in perimenopausal
women. The most common epithelial tumours are serous cystadenomas, accounting for 20–30% of benign
tumours in women under 40. Serous cystadenomas are typically unilocular and unilateral, whereas
mucinous cystadenomas are large multiloculated cysts that are bilateral in 10% of cases.

Figure 11.2 Torsion of a dermoid cyst at laparotomy.
Brenner tumours are small tumours often found incidentally within the ovary. They contain urotheliallike epithelium and may rarely secrete oestrogen.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Sex cord stromal tumours
Ovarian fibromas are the most common sex cord stromal tumours. They are solid ovarian tumours
composed of stromal cells. They present in older women, often with torsion due to the heaviness of the
ovary. Occasionally, patients may present with Meig syndrome (pleural effusion, ascites and ovarian
fibroma). Following removal of the ovarian fibroma, the pleural effusion will usually resolve.
Thecomas are benign oestrogen-secreting tumours. They often present after the menopause with
manifestations of excess oestrogen production, usually postmenopausal bleeding. Although benign, they
may induce an endometrial carcinoma.

Other ovarian cysts
Other non-ovarian cysts can occasionally present as ovarian tumours. Fimbrial cysts and paratubal cysts
originate from the adjacent Fallopian tube and broad ligament. The uncommon embryologically derived
paraovarian cysts of Morgani are large collections of grape-like cysts derived from the paraoopheron.

Endometriosis
Endometriosis is a common condition that is defined as endometrial tissue lying outside the uterine cavity.
It is usually found within the pelvis, being commonly located on the peritoneum lining the pelvic side
walls, pouch of Douglas, uterosacral ligaments and bladder. This ‘ectopic’ endometrial-like tissue can
induce fibrosis and be found infiltrating into deeper tissue such as the rectovaginal septum and bladder.
When endometrial tissue is implanted into the ovary an endometrioma forms. This cyst may be large and
contains old, altered blood that has a thick brown appearance, and for this reason is frequently referred to
as a ‘chocolate cyst’. Less commonly, endometriotic deposits can be found in other sites such as
umbilicus, abdominal scars and the pleural cavity.
Endometriotic tissue responds to cyclical hormonal changes and therefore undergoes cyclical bleeding
and local inflammatory reactions. These regularly repeated episodes of bleeding and healing lead to
fibrosis and adhesion formation between pelvic organs, causing pain and infertility. In extreme cases a
‘frozen pelvis’ results, where extensive adhesions tether the pelvic organs and obliterate normal pelvic
anatomy.
Adenomyosis is a uterine condition often seen with endometriosis, where islands of endometrial tissue
are found deep within the underlying myometrium (see Chapter 12, Benign conditions of the uterus, cervix
and endometrium).

Incidence
Endometriosis occurs in approximately 5–10% of women of reproductive age. It is found in at least onethird of women undergoing a diagnostic laparoscopy for pelvic pain or infertility. It is a condition that is
oestrogen dependent and therefore it resolves after the menopause or when treatment is directed towards
inducing a pseudomenopause.

Aetiology
www.medicalebookpdf.com

The aetiology of endometriosis is unknown although there are several theories. There is unlikely to be a
single theory that explains its aetiology, but the two most commonly accepted theories are:
• Sampson’s implantation theory: menstrual blood can be seen within the pelvis during laparoscopy at the
time of menses. Sampson’s implantation theory postulates that it is this retrograde menstrual
regurgitation of viable endometrial glands and tissue along patent Fallopian tubes, and that subsequent
implantation on the pelvic peritoneal surface causes endometriosis. Using animal/primate models
endometriosis has been induced with menstrual blood. Implantation of endometrium within human
surgical scars after caesarean section or perineal repair following delivery lends support to this theory.
• Meyer’s ‘coelomic metaplasia’ theory: coelomic epithelium transformation describes the
dedifferentiation of peritoneal cells lining the Müllerian duct back to their primitive origin, which then
transform into endometrial cells. This transformation into endometrial cells may be due to hormonal
stimuli or inflammatory irritation.

Genetic and immunological factors
It has been suggested that genetic and immunological factors may alter the susceptibility of a woman and
allow her to develop endometriosis. There appears to be an increased incidence in first-degree relatives
of patients with the disorder and racial differences, with increased incidence among oriental women and
a low prevalence in women of Afro-Caribbean origin.

Vascular and lymphatic spread
Vascular and lymphatic embolization to distant sites has been demonstrated and explains the rare findings
of endometriosis in sites outside the peritoneal cavity, such as the lung.

Clinical features
Classical clinical features are severe cyclical non-colicky pelvic pain restricted to around the time of
menstruation, sometimes associated with heavy menstrual loss. Symptoms may begin a few days before
menses starts until the end of menses. However, women often also complain of chronic non-cyclical
pelvic pain and severe fatigue. It is well recognized that there is a lack of correlation between the extent
of the disease and the intensity of symptoms.
Pelvic pain presenting with colicky pain throughout the menstrual cycle may be associated with
irritable bowel syndrome symptoms. Deep pain with intercourse (deep dyspareunia) and on defaecation
(dyschezia) are key indicators of the presence of endometriosis deep within the pouch of Douglas.
Endometriosis in distant sites can cause local symptoms, for example cyclical epistaxis with nasal
passage deposits and cyclical rectal bleeding with bowel deposits (Table 11.3).

Diagnosis
Physical examination
The accuracy of clinical examination in diagnosing endometriosis is limited and so the condition should
be suspected even if the vaginal examination is normal. Positive examination findings indicative of
endometriosis include thickening or nodularity of the uterosacral ligaments, tenderness in the pouch of
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Douglas, an adnexal mass or a fixed retroverted uterus. However, pelvic tenderness alone is non-specific,
and differential diagnoses for restricted mobility of the uterus include chronic PID and uterine, ovarian or
cervical malignancy. In these conditions, other suggestive features are usually present, and imaging would
rule out features of malignancy.

Table 11.3 Symptoms of endometriosis in relation to site of lesion

Ultrasound
TVUSS can detect endometriosis involving the ovaries (endometriomas or chocolate cysts) but its use in
diagnosing smaller lesions is limited, although findings such as ovaries fixed together or to the back of the
uterus (kissing ovaries) add strength to the diagnosis. In women with symptoms and signs of rectal
endometriosis, TVUSS may be useful for identifying rectal disease, although again a negative scan does
not exclude the disease.
eResource 11.2
TVUSS of the pelvis with endometriosis
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv11.2.php

Magnetic resonance imaging
www.medicalebookpdf.com

MRI can detect lesions >5 mm in size, particularly in deep tissues, for example the rectovaginal septum.
This can allow careful presurgical planning in difficult cases.

Laparoscopy
Although laparoscopy remains the traditional method for diagnosis, it is based on the accuracy of the
visual diagnosis of endometriotic lesions, which is dependent on the experience of the surgeon. The
endometriotic lesions can be red, puckered, black ‘matchstick’ or appear white and fibrous (Figure 11.3).
The advantage of laparoscopy is that it allows lesions to be biopsied for histological confirmation of
diagnosis and it affords concurrent surgical diathermy and/or excision of the endometriotic lesions and
also staging of the disease. The patency of the Fallopian tubes can also be checked.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 11.3 Laparoscopic view of endometriosis. A: Red lesions on peritoneum; B: black ‘matchstick’
lesions; C: white fibrous lesion.

Biomarkers
www.medicalebookpdf.com

There has been recent interest in the diagnosis of endometriosis using immunological biomarkers, such as
CA125, in plasma, urine or serum. However, to date these non-invasive diagnostic approaches are too
inaccurate for use in clinical practice.

Endometriosis and infertility
It is estimated that between 30% and 40% of patients with endometriosis complain of difficulty in
conceiving. In many patients, there is a multifactorial pathogenesis to this subfertility (see Chapter 7,
Subfertility). It is uncertain if and why minimal endometriotic deposits might render a patient subfertile.
However, in the more severe stages of endometriosis, there is commonly anatomical distortion, with
periadnexal adhesions and destruction of ovarian tissue when endometriomas develop. A number of
possible and variable mechanisms have been postulated to connect mild endometriosis with infertility
(Table 11.4).
From the balance of available evidence, medical treatment of endometriosis does not improve fertility
and should not be given to patients wishing to conceive. However, surgical ablation/excision of minimal
and mild endometriosis does improve fertility chances. It is uncertain whether surgical treatment of
endometriomas increase spontaneous or in-vitro fertilization (IVF) pregnancy rates, as the removal of the
endometriomas must be balanced against damage to ovarian tissue. The consensus from fertility
specialists at present is to leave endometriomas alone prior to IVF unless they are symptomatic or reduce
access for egg collection.

Management
Analgesics and hormonal ovarian suppression can be effective for treating cyclical and non-cyclical
pelvic pain associated with endometriosis. Medical treatment of presumed endometriosis can be started if
the clinical examination and TVUSS are normal, without the need for more invasive laparoscopy.
However, if no symptom relief is obtained after 3–6 months of treatment, a laparoscopy should be
considered. Patients with endometriosis are often difficult to treat, not only from a physical point of view,
but also often because of associated psychological issues associated with their pain. Long-term
therapeutic strategies should be formulated where possible. Coexisting additional diseases such as
irritable bowel syndrome and constipation (present in up to 80% of cases) should also be treated to
improve overall success rates. Endometriosis is known to recur throughout reproductive life and it is
impossible to guarantee complete cure. Treatment should therefore be tailored for the individual
according to her age, symptoms, extent of the disease and her desire to have children. In a significant
proportion of patients there is little progression of the disease over time, and this may be reassuring. Due
to the variation in presentation it has been shown that there is a significant delay to diagnosis, with
research indicating around 6 years on average, and some patients will be relieved by a positive
laparoscopy that validates their symptoms.

Table 11.4 Infertility and endometriosis – possible mechanisms

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Medical therapy
Analgesics
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are potent analgesics and are helpful in reducing the
severity of dysmenorrhoea and pelvic pain. However, they have no specific impact on the disease and
hence their use is for symptom control only. The additional use of codeine/opiates should be avoided as
the coexisting irritable bowel symptoms can be worsened, exacerbating pelvic pain symptoms.

Combined oral contraceptives
In the absence of contraindications (see Chapter 6, Contraception and abortion) or desire for pregnancy,
the COCP should be considered because it has been shown to reduce endometriosis-associated
dyspareunia, dysmenorrhoea and non-menstrual pain as well as providing cycle control and
contraception. The COCP can be taken sequentially with the usual 7-day pill-free break but may be more
effective in alleviating pain symptoms, especially cyclical dysmenorrhoea, if it is tricycled (where three
packets are taken back to back) or taken continuously without a break, inducing amenorrhoea. If the COCP
achieves symptomatic relief, then this therapy can be continued for several years until pregnancy is
intended. If symptoms persist, the diagnosis should be reviewed and common coexisting conditions such
as irritable bowel disease and constipation treated (e.g. encouraging a high-fibre diet and adequate fluid
intake). Alternative medical or surgical treatments should be discussed (see below).

Progestogens
www.medicalebookpdf.com

In those where there are risk factors for the use of a COCP, progestogens should be used to induce
amenorrhoea. The long-acting reversible contraceptives (LARCs), depot-medroxyprogesterone acetate
and the levonorgestrel intrauterine system (LNG-IUS) (Mirena®) are particularly useful in providing a
long-term therapeutic effect particularly after surgical treatment. The effect is probably related to 100%
compliance with treatment.

Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonists
Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonists (GnRH-a) are effective in relieving the severity and symptoms
of endometriosis. GnRH has been discussed in Chapter 4, Disorders of menstrual bleeding. Despite their
side-effects, the drugs are well tolerated by some and they have become established agents in the
diagnosis (if CPP is of a gynaecological origin [e.g. endometriosis], then symptoms will be eradicated)
and treatment of endometriosis. They are available as multiple, daily-administered intranasal sprays but
are usually administered as slow-release depot formulations, each lasting for 1 month or more. Long-term
use over 6 months is precluded because drug-induced osteoporosis results The recurrence of symptoms
on cessation of therapy is usually rapid.

Other hormonal agents
In the past, the ovarian suppressive agents danazol and gestrinone were used to good effect, but are no
longer appropriate as newer treatment have become available, notably LNG-IUS. They had a number of
androgenic side-effects, such as weight gain, greasy skin and acne as well as causing alterations in lipid
profiles and liver function and potential deepening of the voice.
There has been some interest in a newer class of drug called aromatase inhibitors that inhibit the
action of the enzyme aromatase, which converts androgens into oestrogens and is over expressed in
endometriotic tissue. Further research is ongoing for their use in refractory cases.

Surgical treatment
Fertility-sparing surgery
Most surgery for endometriosis can be achieved laparoscopically. Symptomatic endometriotic chocolate
cysts should not just be drained but the inner cyst lining should be excised to reduce the risk of
recurrence; however, this will be associated with damage to functional ovarian tissue. Therefore, when
drainage is performed as an adjunct to fertility treatment, drainage only may be considered. Deposits of
superficial peritoneal endometriosis can be easily ablated or excised during laparoscopy using diathermy
or laser energy.
Specialist surgery is needed to treat endometriosis where the disease has caused extensive adhesions
distorting normal pelvic anatomy or involved other organs such as the rectum, large bowel or bladder, or
when there are rectovaginal nodules of disease. Recurrent risks following conservative surgery are as
high as 30% and therefore concurrent long-term medical therapy is often necessary and started straight
after surgery.

Hysterectomy and oophorectomy
Hysterectomy with removal of the ovaries and all visible endometriosis lesions should be considered
only in women who have completed their family and failed to respond to more conservative treatments.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Women should be informed that hysterectomy will not necessarily cure the symptoms or the disease.
Oestrogen-only hormone replacement therapy (HRT) can be started immediately following surgery once
the patient is mobile, but some surgeons prefer to defer commencing HRT for up to 6 months to prevent
activation of any residual disease. Combined (oestrogen and progestogen) HRT can also be considered as
a suppressive treatment, where reactivation of new or residual disease is suspected.

Chronic pelvic pain
CPP is a debilitating symptom among women, which has a major impact on health-related quality of life,
work productivity and health care utilization. The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
(RCOG) has defined CPP as ‘intermittent or constant pain in the lower abdomen or pelvis of a woman of
at least 6 months in duration, not occurring exclusively with menstruation (dysmenorrhoea) or intercourse
and not associated with pregnancy’.

Incidence
CPP presents in primary care as frequently as migraine, asthma or low back pain and accounts for 20% of
all outpatient appointments in gynaecological secondary care. Estimates of prevalence vary widely but
are thought to be between 10% and 20%.

Aetiology
The potential causes of CPP in women are listed in Table 11.5. In contrast to acute pelvic pain, there is
often more than one underlying cause contributing to CPP. The experience of pain is affected by physical,
psychological and social factors.

Table 11.5 Causes of chronic pelvic pain in women

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Diagnosis
A thorough history should include questions about the pattern of the pain and its association with other
problems, such as psychological, bladder and bowel symptoms, and the effect of movement and posture
on the pain. An abdominal and pelvic examination should look for areas of tenderness and pelvic masses
as well as distortion or tethering or prolapse of pelvic organs.

Investigations
Investigations to consider when evaluating women with CPP are shown in Table 11.6. Findings from the
history and examination will dictate the need for further testing; CPP refractory to medical treatment or
associated with abnormal examination findings, such as enlargement, tenderness, irregularity or fixity of
pelvic structures, would indicate the need for further investigation. TVUSS is the least invasive and firstline method of imaging the pelvis. Diagnostic laparoscopy is the most invasive test for evaluating the
female pelvis and has been regarded as the ‘gold standard’ investigation for CPP. However, depending on
the preceding work-up, 40% of diagnostic laparoscopies fail to show any cause for the CPP symptoms.
Structural pathologies identified at laparoscopy can often be surgically treated at the same time.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Management
The multifactorial nature of CPP should be discussed and explored with the patient from the start. General
health advice including the importance of diet, hydration, exercise and sexual health should be given.
Analgesia such as NSAIDs, opiates and paracetamol to control pain should be discussed. Where clinical
examination and USS are normal, women with cyclical CPP should be offered a therapeutic trial using
hormonal treatment to suppress ovarian function for a period of 3–6 months before having a diagnostic
laparoscopy. Hormonal treatments include the COCP, systemic and local (LNG-IUS) progestogens and
GnRH-analogues. Structural pathologies can be treated surgically, usually via laparoscopy, including
removal of adnexal masses, treatment of endometriosis and adhesiolysis.
If the nature of the CPP is thought to be primarily non-gynaecological then referral to the relevant
health care professional such as gastroenterologist, urologist, genitourinary medicine physician,
physiotherapist, psychologist or psychosexual counsellor should be made. If, despite the above
interventions, pain is not adequately controlled, consideration should be given to referral to a pain
management team or a specialist pelvic pain clinic.

Table 11.6 Common investigations for chronic pelvic pain (CPP)
Investigation

Indication

Potential diagnoses

Genital tract
swabs

All sexually active women should be
offered screening for STIs such as
Chlamydia trachomatis or gonococcus

Pelvic infection/PID

Pelvic USS

Suspected pelvic masses

Adnexal masses – ovarian cysts
including endometriomas,
hydrosalpinges, tubo-ovarian
abscesses
Uterine pathology – adenomyosis,
fibroids

MRI

Further assessment of pelvic masses or
suspected deep infiltrating endometriosis

Further characterize masses seen on
USS
Rectovaginal endometriosis

Where pelvic masses, endometriosis or
adhesions are suspected

Superficial and deep infiltrating
endometriosis
Abdominopelvic adhesions
Pelvic masses

Laparoscopy

MRI, magneic resonance imaging; PID, pelvic inflammatory disease; STI, sexually-transmitted infection;
USS, ultrasound scan.

KEY LEARNING POINTS
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• Commonly encountered benign ovarian tumours include functional cysts, teratomas (dermoid cysts)
and endometriomas.
• Ovarian cysts can be asymptomatic or present with pain or as an abdominal mass. Acute pain may
arise because of an ovarian cyst ‘accident’ such as haemorrhage, rupture or torsion.
• TVUSS is the primary test used to diagnose different types of ovarian cyst. Along with the CA125
serological tumour marker, ultrasound can be used to help differentiate between benign and
malignant ovarian tumours.
• Treatment is based on the symptoms, size and type of cyst. Ovarian cystectomy or even
oophorectomy may be required and this is usually undertaken using a laparoscopic approach.
• Endometriosis refers to the finding of endometrial glands and stroma outside of the uterus and is
one of the commonest conditions seen in gynaecology, affecting 5–10% of women of reproductive
age.
• Endometriosis usually presents with cyclical non-colicky pelvic pain around the time of
menstruation, and is sometimes associated with heavy menstrual loss. However, affected women
may also complain of chronic non-cyclical pelvic pain, dyspareunia, dyschezia and severe fatigue.
• Endometriosis is associated with tubal and ovarian damage and the formation of adhesions and can
compromise fertility.
• Medical treatment of endometriosis involves suppressing oestrogen levels to induce amenorrhoea
using the COCP, progestogens or GnRH agonists.
• Conservative laparoscopic surgical treatment of endometriosis involves excising or ablating
visible lesions. More radical excisional laparoscopic surgery may be required for deeply
infiltrating endometriosis involving the bowel and rectovaginal septum. Total hysterectomy and
bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy is often undertaken for refractory symptoms.
• CPP is usually multifactorial involving physical, psychological and social factors. Management
should be directed at the underlying causes and include general health advice, analgesics,
hormonal therapies and surgery. Multidisciplinary pelvic pain clinics are necessary to manage
severe, refractory cases.

Further reading
Dunselman GA, Vermeulen N, Becker C, et al. (2014). ESHRE guideline: management of women with
endometriosis. Hum Reprod 29(3):400–12. doi: 10.1093/humrep/det457.
NHS
Clinical
Knowledge
Summaries
on
Endometriosis.
Available
from:
www.cks.nhs.uk/endometriosis. April 2015.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34: Ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women. RCOG 2010 [on line
source: https://www.rcog.org.uk/globalassets/documents/guidelines/gtg34ovariancysts.pdf].
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 41: The initial management of chronic pelvic pain. RCOG 2012 [on
line source https://www.rcog.org.uk/globalassets/documents/guidelines/gtg_41.pdf].
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 62: Management of suspected ovarian masses in premenopausal
women.
RCOG
2011
[on
line
source:
https://www.rcog.org.uk/globalassets/documents/guidelines/gtg_62.pdf].
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Self assessment
CASE HISTORY
A 26-year-old law student presents with a 2-year history of CPP. She admits to a poor diet but is
otherwise fit and healthy. She contracted genital chlamydial infection from a previous relationship 3
years ago, but is currently in a new and stable relationship. A urinary pregnancy test has been
performed and the result is negative.
A What questions would you ask about the presenting complaint?
B What features of the history would suggest a gynaecological cause for the pain?
C What features from a bimanual pelvic examination would suggest a gynaecological cause for
the pain?
D List likely gynaecological causes of CPP.
E List likely non-gynaecological causes of CPP.
F Suggest diagnostic tests you would perform.
G How might you manage this patient?
ANSWERS
A Establish the nature of the pain, such as using ‘SOCRATES’ – Site, Onset (e.g. relationship to
chlamydial infection), Character, Radiation (gynaecological pain may be bilateral and into the
back, groins and vagina), Associations, Time course (especially relationship to the menstrual
cycle), Exacerbating/relieving factors (e.g. sexual intercourse, voiding and defaecation), Severity
(e.g. effect on activities of daily living, use of analgesics, etc).
B Onset or exacerbation in relation to the menstrual cycle along with deep dyspareunia is suggestive
of a gynaecological origin for the pain, although CPP is often multifactorial.
C Presence of a pelvic mass may suggest the presence of an adnexal mass (e.g. ovarian cyst,
hydrosalpinx) or enlarged uterus (e.g. fibroids, adenomyosis). Tenderness, fixed, immobile pelvic
organs (suggestive of adhesions secondary to endometriosis or infection) and nodularity of the
uterosacral ligaments (indicative of deep infiltrating endometriosis) are other features to assess.
D Chronic PID causing adhesions and/or a chronic tubo-ovarian abscess should be considered given
the history of a sexually transmitted infection. Endometriosis is common in women of reproductive
age and usually presents in the second or third decade. An ovarian cyst should form part of the
differential diagnosis.
E Gastrointestinal causes such as irritable bowel syndrome or constipation in light of her poor diet.
A negative pregnancy test excludes an ectopic pregnancy. Genitourinary problems such as bladder
pain syndrome, musculoskeletal causes, neuropathic pain and psychological contributors should be
evaluated depending on the history and examination.
F Genital tract swabs and a midstream urine specimen (if there are symptoms). First-line imaging
should be a pelvic USS in order to identify uterine and adnexal masses. Laparoscopy to detect
www.medicalebookpdf.com

adhesions and endometriosis if the pain is resistant to medical treatment or the gynaecological
examination is abnormal.
G This depends on the cause. General health advice, analgesics and hormonal treatments (e.g. the
COCP, systemic and local [LNG-IUS]) to suppress ovulation for at least 3–6 months assuming a
likely gynaecological origin for the chronic pain and the absence of an adnexal mass requiring
surgical removal. Laparoscopic surgery should be considered in the presence of adhesions
(adhesiolysis), endometriosis (excision or ablation of endometriotic deposits) or adnexal
pathology (removal of adnexal masses [e.g. ovarian cystectomy]).

EMQ
A Endometriosis.
B Adenomyosis.
C Bladder pain syndrome.
D Irritable bowel syndrome.
E Constipation.
F Depression.
G Nerve entrapment.
H Torted ovarian cyst.
I Endometrioma.
J Dermoid cyst (benign teratoma).
K Functional ovarian cyst.
L Tube–ovarian abscess.
For each description below, choose the SINGLE most appropriate answer from the above list of
options. Each option may be used once, more than once or not at all.
1 A recently divorced 36-year-old woman presents with 6 months of generalized pelvic pain,
insomnia, fatigue, constipation and headaches. On further questioning she admits to being anxious
and tearful.
2 A parous, 30-year-old woman complains of increasingly heavy menstrual periods that are painful
throughout their 5 day duration. She is pain free for the rest of the month. On examination she has
an enlarged ‘bulky’ uterus.
3 A 22-year-old woman presents with a history of CPP and dyspareunia. She has a history of
chlamydial infection when she was 19 years old. On vaginal examination a tender mass is
palpable and pelvic USS confirms the presence of bilateral complex adnexal masses.
4 A 24-year-old woman presents with long-standing pelvic pain. Her periods are painful for the first
day but are regular and light. She has occasional pain with sexual intercourse. She admits to being
an anxious person and weight conscious, exercising daily. She opens her bowels on alternate days
and sometimes has loose stools as well as feeling bloated, especially prior to her period.
5 A 38-year-old woman complains of pelvic pain for the last 5 years. The pain can be worse
cyclically but she has not noted a definite pattern to it. She has been treated for recurrent urinary
tract infections by her general practitioner (GP) because of pain and pressure on voiding urine
www.medicalebookpdf.com

along with urgency and frequency. However, many of these infections have not been confirmed on
microbiological examination of midstream urine specimens (MSUs). A laparoscopy 3 years ago
was normal.
ANSWERS
1F The generalized somatic symptoms of depression are clear here, and abdominal pain is common
in this scenario. If the pain persisted after the emotional problems had passed then further
investigations would be indicated. Investigations at this point may increase anxiety, unless of
course there were clear clinical findings.
2B The key symptom here is pain with the bleed that persists throughout the period. This makes
endometriosis unlikely, as this is associated with premenstrual pain as a rule. Tubo-ovarian
pathology would not cause cyclical menstrual pain.
3L Pelvic inflammaory disease can cause the tubes to be obstructed and swell to cause
hydrosalpinges. Subsequently, infection can turn the tubes into abscesses that can envelop the
ovary, a tubo-ovarian abscess. This may be bilateral. The inflammation surrounding this can
cause a ‘frozen pelvis’, where the pelvic organs become stuck together and immobile, causing
pain. The differential diagnosis would be endometriosis, but the history and the TVUSS findings
make this unlikely. TVUSS with severe endometriosis would show the presence of ovarian
endometriomas, but usually the tubes would not be involved.
4D The normal periods (pain on day 1 being a common and non-pathological complaint), and lack of
symptoms in the pelvis specifically, makes a gynaecological cause for pain unlikely. Patients are
frequently seen to exclude a gynaecological cause of pain, because it can be difficult to pinpoint
the site of pain. The alteration in the bowel habit and the bloating is the key to diagnosing
irritable bowel. Irritable bowel is often worse premenstrually because the progesterone of the
luteal phase causes a relaxation of the smooth muscle in bowel.
5C The symptoms point to the bladder as the site of pain. It is useful that the GP has performed
MSUs to exclude recurrent urinary tract infections. Occasionally there is a spot of endometriosis
causing bladder pain, but the laparoscopy 3 years previously excludes this.

SBA QUESTIONS
1 A 25-year-old parous woman is admitted to hospital with acute left-sided, colicky pain. She has no
abnormal vaginal discharge nor urinary or bowel symptoms. She is apyrexial and tachycardic. On
examination her abdomen is soft, not distended and non-tender. She has not missed a menstrual
period and her urinary pregnancy test is negative. She requires morphine for pain relief.
Which diagnostic test would you consider first-line in this situation? Choose the single best
answer.
A Serum βhCG.
B MRI.
C CT scan.
D Transabdominal + transvaginal pelvic USS.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

E Laparoscopy.
ANSWER
D The clinical assessment of this woman suggests that she has considerable pain necessitating
narcotic analgesia but does not have an acute surgical abdomen. Thus immediate surgery in the
form of laparoscopy or laparotomy is not indicated. In the absence of genitourinary or
gastrointestinal symptoms or a temperature or significant abdominal tenderness on examination,
infection and/or peritonitis is unlikely. An ovarian cystic accident is the most likely
gynaecological diagnosis. Of the radiological imaging tests listed, pelvic USS is the safest and
most readily available and provides excellent images of adnexal cystic masses. An early
pregnancy complication such as an ectopic pregnancy is improbable given that she has not missed
a period and the urinary pregnancy test (UPT) is negative; a UPT has high sensitivity and so serum
quantification of βhCG levels is unnecessary.

2 A 32-year-old woman has a pelvic TVUSS as part of investigations for primary subfertility. The
scan shows bilateral 5 cm ‘kissing’ ovarian cysts in the pouch of Douglas, both of which contain
diffuse, low-level echoes giving a solid ‘ground-glass’ appearance. She reports severe
dysmenorrhoea and dyspareunia.
What type of ovarian cysts are these most likely to be? Choose the single best answer.
A Haemorrhagic functional ovarian cysts.
B Dermoid cysts.
C Endometriomas.
D Tubo-ovarian abscesses.
E Serous cystadenomas.
ANSWER
C The age of this woman and her history of subfertility and cyclical pain are consistent with the
presence of endometriosis (‘chocolate cysts’). Furthermore, the close proximity of both ovaries,
known as ‘kissing ovaries’, is caused by adhesions, which is considered a sign of pelvic
endometriosis and would cause pain with sexual intercourse. The description on ultrasound of
homogenous, low-level ‘echoes’ represents old altered blood are also characteristic of
endometriomas. However, the solid appearance could also reflect a haemorrhagic cyst, dermoid
cyst or chronic tubo-ovarian abscess. A tubo-ovarian abscess can also be associated with
subfertility and dyspareunia although not typically cyclical pain. The other cysts listed are usually
asymptomatic or present with non-cyclical pelvic pain. Serous cystadenomas are rarely bilateral,
usually asymptomatic unless large (>10 cm) and clear without solid components.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

www.medicalebookpdf.com

CHAPTER 12

Benign conditions of the uterus, cervix and
endometrium
T JUSTIN CLARK

Benign cervical surface lesions
Benign endometrial lesions
Benign lesions of the myometrium
Further reading
Self assessment

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
• Describe the common benign conditions that affect the uterus according to their tissue of origin: the
cervix, the endometrium and the myometrium.
• Understand the presenting symptoms and examination findings associated with benign uterine
pathology.
• Describe the common tests used to evaluate the uterus and endometrial cavity.
• Explain the available treatment options for uterine fibroids and adenomyosis and the rationale for
selection.

Uterine cervix
www.medicalebookpdf.com

The cervix is the cylindrical lower extremity of the uterus and consists mainly of collagen fibres. The
vaginal part of the cervix, called the ectocervix, is lined by thick non-keratinized stratified squamous
epithelium and has a pink appearance. The external os is visible in the centre of the ectocervix as a dark
circular or slit-like area and is the opening to the endocervical canal, which is lined by simple columnar
epithelium. There is a clear demarcation of this transformation between the two types of epithelium,
called the ‘squamocolumnar junction’. This anatomical junction fluctuates under hormonal influence as
described further in Chapters 1, The development and anatomy of the female sexual organs and pelvis,
and Chapter 16, Premalignant and malignant disease of the lower genital tract. Benign lesions can occur
on the surface or structure of the cervix.

Benign cervical surface lesions
Cervical ectropion
In women of reproductive age the columnar epithelium is visible on the ectocervix as a circular, red area
surrounding the external cervical os (Figure 12.1A). This is a normal finding and should not be called
‘cervical erosion’ because this erroneously implies it is an ulcer. An ectropion commonly develops under
the influence of the ‘three Ps’: puberty, pill and pregnancy. The fragile, glandular columnar epithelium of
a large cervical ectropion may predispose to intermenstrual and postcoital bleeding (IMB, PCB). Some
women may present with an excessive, clear, odourless mucus-type discharge. To reduce the ectropion
and associated symptoms women should be changed from oestrogen-based hormonal contraceptives. The
other option is cervical ablation where the visible glandular producing columnar cells are ablated,
usually with cryocautery, as an outpatient. Prior to treatment end, cervical and lower genital tract swabs
are taken to exclude chlamydia and other sexually-transmitted infections and normal cervical cytology
should be confirmed to exclude cervical premalignancy and malignancy (see Chapter 16, Premalignant
and malignant disease of the lower genital tract).

Nabothian follicles
Sometimes the columnar glands within the transformation zone become sealed over, forming small,
mucus-filled cysts visible on the ectocervix. These are termed ‘nabothian follicles’ and are of no
pathological significance. No treatment is usually required although extremely large ones can be drained
using a large-bore needle (Figure 12.1B).

Cervical polyps
Cervical polyps are benign tumours arising from the endocervical epithelium and may be seen as smooth,
reddish protrusions. They are usually asymptomatic, being identified incidentally during a routine
cervical smear, but as with a cervical ectropion they can cause vaginal discharge, IMB and PCB. They
are easily removed by avulsion with polyp forceps as an outpatient.

Cervical stenosis
Cervical stenosis refers to pathological narrowing of the endocervical canal and is usually an iatrogenic
phenomenon caused by a surgical event. Treatment of premalignant disease of the cervix using a cone
www.medicalebookpdf.com

biopsy or loop diathermy can cause cervical stenosis, as can endometrial ablation affecting the os. The
ensuing trapped blood in the uterus (haematometra) causes cyclical dysmenorrhoea with no associated
menstrual bleeding. Treatment is by surgical dilatation of the cervix under ultrasound or hysteroscopic
guidance.

Benign endometrial lesions
Endometrial polyps
Endometrial polyps are focal endometrial outgrowths containing a variable amount of glands, stroma and
blood vessels, which influence their macroscopic appearance. Endometrial polyps may be asymptomatic
but can cause abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB) (heavy menstrual bleeding [HMB], IMB and
postmenopausal bleeding [PMB]) and adversely impact on fertility. They are common and estimated to be
present in around 10–20% of women with AUB and 10% of women with subfertility. Risk factors for
endometrial polyp development include obesity, late menopause, the use of the partial oestrogen agonist
tamoxifen and possibly the use of hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Most polyps do not appear to be
subject to the normal cellular mechanisms that regulate the endometrium. Consequently, they are relatively
insensitive to cyclical hormonal changes, leading them to persist and cause unscheduled vaginal bleeding.
Endometrial polyps contain hyperplastic foci in 10–25% of symptomatic cases and 1% is frankly
malignant. The risk of polyps harbouring serious endometrial disease is increased after the menopause
and with the use of tamoxifen. Endometrial polyps may be pedunculated or sessile, single or multiple and
vary in size (0.5–4 cm).

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 12.1 Benign changes in the cervix. A: Cervical ectropion; B: nabothian follicle; C: cervical
polyp.
eResource 12.1

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Endometrial polyps
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv12.1.php
Endometrial polyps can be diagnosed by transvaginal ultrasound scan (TVUSS) but because they are
focal, intracavity pathologies the most accurate tests are outpatient hysteroscopy (OPH) and saline
infusion sonography (SIS), because these investigations involve distending the uterine cavity with fluid,
thereby aiding detection (Figure 12.2). Smaller endometrial polyps can spontaneously resolve but most
persist such that once diagnosed, removal is indicated (polypectomy) in order to alleviate AUB
symptoms, optimize fertility and exclude hyperplasia or cancer. Polypectomy is a simple procedure that
can be performed as a day-case under general anaesthesia, but is now increasingly performed as an
outpatient with or without local anaesthesia. A hysteroscope is used to visualize the polyp(s) and to allow
miniature instruments to be passed down its operating channel in order to remove the polyp with scissors,
electrodes or morcellators.

Figure 12.2 A hysteroscopic view of an endometrial polyp.

Asherman syndrome
Irreversible damage of the single layer thick basal endometrium does not allow normal regeneration of the
endometrium. The endometrial cavity undergoes fibrosis and adhesion formation, termed ‘Asherman
syndrome’. The result is reduced, or absent, menstrual shedding and subfertility. This usually occurs after
pregnancy where there has been uterine infection (endometritis) or following overzealous curettage of the
uterine cavity during surgical management of miscarriage or following secondary postpartum
haemorrhage. In this ‘soft’ uterine state, the myometrium (including the basal layer) can be inadvertently
excavated while attempting to evacuate these retained products of conception (RPOC) using metal
instruments or suction cannulae. Prevention of uterine scarring by adopting conservative or less traumatic
surgical approaches to managing RPOC and preventing endometritis is important given its adverse impact
on fertility. To treat Asherman syndrome hysteroscopic surgical techniques are needed to manually break
www.medicalebookpdf.com

down the intrauterine adhesions (adhesiolysis). However, treatment can be difficult and risks further
uterine trauma.
Surgical treatments to deliberately destroy the basal layer have been developed for treatment of HMB,
called endometrial ablation (see Chapter 4, Disorders of menstrual bleeding).

Benign lesions of the myometrium
Uterine fibroids and adenomyosis are the two most prevalent conditions affecting the myometrium.

Fibroids
Classification
A fibroid is a benign tumour of uterine smooth muscle termed a ‘leiomyoma’. The gross appearance is of
a well-demarcated, firm, whorled tumour. They are highly prevalent, being found in approximately 40%
of women overall, and are more common in nulliparous and obese women and in those with a family
history or of African descent. They are usually multiple and can substantially increase the size of the
uterus. Fibroids are classified according to their location in relation to the uterine wall (Figure 12.3).
Uncommonly, fibroids can arise separately from the uterus, especially in the adjacent broad ligament,
presumably from embryonal remnants.

Symptoms caused by fibroids
Most fibroids are small and asymptomatic, but they can be associated with the following conditions:
• AUB (usually HMB and IMB).
• Reproductive failure.
• Subfertility.
• Recurrent pregnancy loss.
• Bulk effects on adjacent structures in the pelvis.
• Pressure and pain.
• Bladder and bowel dysfunction.
• Abdominal distension.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 12.3 Diagram showing the typical sites of uterine fibroids.

Natural history
Fibroids are benign, oestrogen-dependent tumours that can enlarge during pregnancy in response to the
hyperoestrogenic state, become common with advancing reproductive age and shrink after the menopause
when ovarian oestrogen production ceases. They can undergo degenerative change usually in response to
outgrowing their blood supply. Three forms of degeneration are recognized:
• Red – haemorrhage and necrosis occurs within the fibroid typically presenting in the midsecond
trimester pregnancy with acute pain.
• Hyaline – asymptomatic softening and liquefaction of the fibroid.
• Cystic – asymptomatic central necrosis leaving cystic spaces at the centre. Degenerative changes can
initiate calcium deposition leading to calcification. Rarely, malignant or sarcomatous degeneration can
occur but the incidence of this is 1:350 cases or less. The suspicion is greatest in the postmenopausal
period when there is a rapidly increasing size of the fibroid.

Clinical features
Fibroids can cause several gynaecological complaints and are one of the commonest indications for
hysterectomy. However, the vast majority of fibroids are asymptomatic. Abdominal examination might
indicate the presence of a firm mass arising from the pelvis. Unless fibroids cause symptoms they do not
require any treatment. Common presenting symptoms include menstrual disturbance and pressure or ‘bulk’
symptoms, especially urinary frequency, and infertility. Pain is unusual, except in the special circumstance
of acute red degeneration or torsion of a pedunculated fibroid (Figure 12.4).
Subfertility may result from mechanical distortion or occlusion of the Fallopian tubes, and an
endometrial cavity grossly distorted by submucous fibroids may prevent implantation of a fertilized ovum.
Removal of submucosal fibroids can enhance fertility and also outcomes with assisted reproductive
techniques such as in-vitro fertilization (IVF). However, the effectiveness of surgically removing the other
types of fibroids is less clear and risks hysterectomy in 1% of cases because of significant intraoperative
bleeding. Thus, these fibroids should only be removed if symptomatic and where there is proven,
otherwise unexplained, infertility. Once a pregnancy is established, however, the risk of miscarriage is
www.medicalebookpdf.com

not increased. In late pregnancy, fibroids located in the cervix or lower uterine segment may cause an
abnormal lie. After delivery, postpartum haemorrhage may occur due to inefficient uterine contraction.

Figure 12.4 Pedunculated, subserosal fibroid on a hysterectomy specimen.

Examination findings suggestive of uterine fibroids
• General: signs of anaemia.
• Abdominal examination: visible and/or palpable abdominal mass arising from the pelvis*.
• Bimanual examination: enlarged, firm, smooth or irregular, non-tender# uterus palpable.
* See Chapter 2, Gynaecological history, examination and investigations, and imaging for determining
the pelvic origin of a mass; # tenderness may suggest red degeneration.

Diagnosis
Often the clinical features obtained from the history and examination alone will be sufficient to establish
the diagnosis. A full blood count should be taken in women with HMB; severe anaemia associated with
HMB invariably indicates the presence of significant fibroids.
Abdominopelvic ultrasound (TAUSS and TVUSS) is the mainstay of diagnosis and helps delineate the
origin of a clinically-detected pelvic mass (i.e. distinguishing between a uterine fibroid and an ovarian
tumour, and locating the position and size of fibroids). In the presence of large fibroids, ultrasonography
is also helpful to exclude hydronephrosis from pressure on the ureters. MRI is occasionally used to
demarcate the morphology, size and location of uterine fibroids prior to radiological or surgical
intervention (Figure 12.5).

Useful tests where uterine fibroids are suspected
• TVUSS: good for detecting and locating submucous fibroids and small intramural fibroids.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• Transabdominal ultrasound scan (TAUSS): good for detecting larger intramural and subserosal
fibroids and excluding hydronephrosis secondary to pressure from fibroids obstructing the ureters.
• SIS: good for detecting and locating submucosal fibroids and endometrial polyps.
• Hysteroscopy:
• good for detecting submucosal fibroids and endometrial polyps;
• good for planning subsequent hysteroscopic surgical treatment;
• surgical hysteroscopy can remove polyps, adhesions and submucosal fibroids.
• Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI):
• good for describing the morphology and location of fibroids;
• indicated prior to uterine artery embolization and to monitor treatment response.

Treatment of fibroids
Medical treatment
Conservative management is appropriate where asymptomatic fibroids are detected incidentally. The
main types of medical treatment for HMB (see Chapter 4, Disorders of menstrual bleeding) namely the
levonorgestrel intrauterine system (LNG-IUS), tranexamic acid, mefenamic acid and the combined oral
contraceptive pill (COCP) tend to be ineffective in the presence of a submucous fibroid or an enlarged
uterus that is palpable abdominally (>12 weeks size). The only effective medical treatment is to use
injectable gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists, which induce a menopausal state by
shutting down ovarian oestradiol production. However, GnRH treatment is not tolerated by all women
because of severe menopausal symptoms. More recently, the selective progesterone receptor modulator
(SPRM) ulipristal acetate has been shown to be as effective as GnRH agonists in reducing fibroid volume
and alleviating HMB symptoms, although it is not yet widely accepted into clinical practice. In addition to
being an oral tablet, this SPRM does not induce a menopausal state and associated symptoms. However,
neither GnRH nor SPRM represent a viable long-term treatment option. Moreover, when ovarian function
returns, the fibroids regrow to their previous dimensions.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 12.5 Magnetic resonance imaging of an enlarged fibroid uterus.

Surgical treatment
The choice of surgical treatment is determined by the presenting complaint and the patient’s aspirations
for menstrual function and fertility. Minimally invasive hysteroscopic surgery can be used to cut away a
submucous fibroid or fibroid polyp, helping to resolve HMB symptoms even in the presence of other
types of fibroid (see Chapter 4, Disorders of menstrual bleeding and Chapter 17, Gynaecological surgery
and therapeutics).
Where a bulky fibroid uterus causes pressure symptoms or where HMB is refractory to medical
interventions, the options are myomectomy to surgically remove fibroids with uterine conservation, or
hysterectomy. Myomectomy will be the preferred option where preservation of fertility is required, and
this procedure can be performed through a laparotomy incision or, increasingly, laparoscopically where
‘power morcellation’ of the removed fibroids is required to debulk the tumour to facilitate removal
through a small 15 mm laparoscopic port site. An important point for the preoperative discussion during
the consent process for myomectomy is that there is a small but significant risk of uncontrolled lifethreatening bleeding during myomectomy, which could lead to hysterectomy.
eResource 12.2
Surgical treatment of fibroids
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv12.2.php
Hysterectomy and myomectomy may be facilitated by GnRH agonist pretreatment over a 3-month
period to reduce the bulk and vascularity of the fibroids. Useful benefits of this approach are to enable a
suprapubic (low transverse) rather than a midline abdominal incision, or to facilitate vaginal rather than
abdominal hysterectomy, both of which are conducive to more rapid recovery and fewer postoperative
complications. GnRH agonist pretreatment can obscure tissue planes around the fibroid making surgery
more difficult but, on the positive side, blood loss and the likely need for transfusion are reduced.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Radiological
Uterine artery embolization (UAE) is a technique performed by interventional radiologists. It involves
embolization of both uterine arteries under radiological guidance. A small incision is made in the groin
under local anaesthesia and a cannula placed into the femoral artery and guided into the uterine arteries.
Embolization particles are then injected, reducing the blood supply to the uterus, which induces infarction
and degeneration of fibroids such that the overall reduction in fibroid volume is around 50%. Following
UAE, patients usually require admission overnight because of pain following arterial occlusion, requiring
opiate analgesia. Complications include fever, infection, fibroid expulsion and potential ovarian failure.
Women wishing to retain their fertility should be counselled carefully before undergoing UAE as the
effects on subsequent reproductive function are uncertain. Pregnancies have been reported in the
literature, but concerns remain over premature ovarian failure and effects on the endometrium that may
lead to abnormal placentation. The procedure is equivalent to myomectomy for alleviating fibroid-related
HMB and pressure symptoms. However, one-third of women subsequently require further medical,
radiological or surgical intervention within 5 years of UAE. Thus, when counselling women about
treatment options for symptomatic fibroids it is important to balance the less invasive nature of UAE
compared with surgical myomectomy against the much higher likelihood of needing further treatments.

Adenomyosis
The endometrium is usually well demarcated from the underlying myometrium. Adenomyosis is a disorder
in which endometrial glands and stroma are found deep within the myometrium. Adenomyosis can only be
definitively diagnosed following histopathological examination of a hysterectomy specimen, where it is
identified in 40% of uteri from a general female population of reproductive age. This ectopic
endometrium is responsive to cyclical hormonal changes that result in bleeding within the myometrium,
leading to increasingly severe secondary dysmenorrhoea (pain throughout menses), uterine enlargement
and HMB.

Relative advantages and disadvantages
symptomatic uterine fibroids

of

treatments

for

Medical
• Tranexamic acid /non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs [NSAIDs]/COCP/LNG-IUS (Mirena®): all
are simple and fertility sparing (although COCP/LNG-IUS are contraceptive) and avoid more
invasive interventions, but they are generally less effective in the presence of submucosal fibroids
or a uterus >12 weeks size where an enlarged uterine cavity can be expected.
• COCP: contains oestrogen, which may increase the growth of oestrogen-dependent fibroids.
• LNG-IUS: increased likelihood of expulsion if cavity is enlarged or distorted by submucosal
fibroids.
• GnRH-agonists: reduce fibroid volume prior to surgery but induce a temporary oestrogen deficient
‘menopausal’ state precluding long-term use.
• Ulipristal acetate (SPRM): oral medication and, as with GnRH-agonists, it reduces fibroid volume
prior to surgery, but more data about safety with long-term use are needed.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Surgical
• Hysteroscopic myomectomy: minimally invasive, day-case procedure for submucous fibroids that
avoids surgical incisions and is effective in resolving HMB and improving fertility. Will not treat
other types of fibroid.
• Myomectomy: fertility sparing and will treat HMB and bulk symptoms. Usually requires a
laparotomy, but a less invasive laparoscopic approach is possible with smaller and fewer fibroids.
Associated with intraoperative bleeding from vascular fibroids, a 1% risk of unplanned
hysterectomy and postoperative intra-abdominal adhesions.
• Hysterectomy: indicated for women with no future fertility desires. May be achieved vaginally,
laparoscopically or via open surgery depending on the size of the uterus. Definitive, guaranteeing
amenorrhoea but as invasive as myomectomy.
Radiological
• Uterine artery embolization: minimally invasive, avoids general anaesthesia and surgery. Although
fertility sparing there are concerns over effect on subsequent reproductive function. Equivalent
patient satisfaction compared with myomectomy but the need for further treatments much higher.
• Novel radiological treatments are currently being explored to destroy fibroids through thermal
ablation. These include MRI-guided transcutaneous focussed ultrasound and transcervical
intrauterine ultrasound-guided radiofrequency ablation. However, the effectiveness and safety of
these interventions need further study before they can be considered for use in routine clinical
practice.
Women with adenomyosis are usually multiparous and diagnosed in their late 30s or early 40s.
Examination may reveal a bulky and sometimes tender ‘boggy’ uterus, particularly if examined
perimenstrually. Ultrasound examination of the uterus may be helpful for diagnosis when adenomyosis is
particularly localized, showing haemorrhage-filled, distended endometrial glands. Sometimes this may
give an irregular nodular development within the uterus, very similar to that of uterine fibroids. MRI is
the investigation of choice although expensive, as it provides excellent images of the myometrium,
endometrium and areas of adenomyosis (Figure 12.6).

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 12.6 MRI showing adenomyosis – note the bright reflections of the central endometrium and flecks
of ectopic endometrium in the underlying myometrium.
Given the practical difficulty in making the diagnosis of adenomyosis preoperatively, conservative
surgery and medical treatments are so far poorly developed. In general, any treatment that induces
amenorrhoea will be helpful as it will render the ectopic endometrium quiescent, relieving pain and
excessive bleeding. Thus, the use of the progestin-containing long-acting reversible contraceptives
(LARCs, see Chapter 6, Contraception and abortion) such as the LNG-IUS and depot Provero and shortterm GnRH agonists should be considered. On ceasing treatment, however, the symptoms rapidly return in
the majority of patients, and hysterectomy remains the only definitive treatment.

KEY LEARNING POINTS
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• A cervical ectropion is a normal finding in women of reproductive age and is usually due to
hormonal influence – the three Ps: puberty, pill and pregnancy.
• Tests to evaluate the uterus include TVUSS, SIS, MRI, hysteroscopy and endometrial biopsy.
• Endometrial polyps are common, usually benign focal lesions arising from the endometrium. They
can cause abnormal patterns of uterine bleeding including HMB, IMB and PMB.
• Surgical removal of endometrial polyps, known as polypectomy, is a simple procedure usually
performed under direct vision with the aid of a hysteroscope as an outpatient or day-case.
• Fibroids (leiomyomas) are common, oestrogen-dependent, benign tumours of the myometrium and
are estimated to be present in about 40% of women over 30 years of age. Fibroids undergo
shrinkage after the menopause. Malignant change to leiomyosarcomas occurs in 1:350 fibroids and
is usually associated with rapid fibroid growth and AUB in a postmenopausal women.
• Fibroids are classified according to their relationship to the uterine wall, being described as
submucosal or intramural and subserosal. Fibroids can be detected on abdominal and/or bimanual
pelvic examination as an enlarged pelvic mass of uterine origin.
• Fibroids can cause HMB and pressure ‘bulk’-related abdominal symptoms and in some cases
subfertility. However, the vast majority of fibroids are asymptomatic. Treatment is indicated for
symptomatic fibroids. Surgical or radiological intervention is often required because medical
treatments are generally less effective.
• Surgical removal of fibroids is termed myomectomy. Submucous fibroids protrude into the uterine
cavity and so can be removed using hysteroscopic techniques. Intramural and subserosal fibroids
are removed via a laparotomy incision or laparoscopically depending on their size, location and
number.
• Adenomyosis is a disorder in which endometrial glands and stroma are found deep within the
myometrium, which can cause dysmenorrhoea, HMB and uterine enlargement. The mechanism
whereby fibroids affect fertility is unclear.
• Medical treatments such as the LNG-IUS (Mirena®) that can induce amenorrhoea will alleviate
symptoms associated with adenomyosis. Hysterectomy remains the only definitive treatment.

Further reading
American Association of Gynecologic Laparoscopists (2012). AAGL practice report: practice
guidelines for the diagnosis and management of endometrial polyps. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 19:3–
10.
Garcia L, Isaacson K (2011). Adenomyosis: review of the literature. J Minim Invasive Gynecol
18:428–37.
Gupta JK, Sinha A, Lumsden MA, Hickey M (2014). Uterine artery embolization for symptomatic
uterine fibroids. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 12:CD005073.
Munro MG, Critchley HOD, Fraser IS (2012). The FIGO systems for nomenclature and classification of
causes of abnormal uterine bleeding in the reproductive years: who needs them? Am J Obstet Gynecol
207:259–65.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Owen C, Armstrong AY (2015). Clinical management of leiomyoma. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am
42:67–85.

Self assessment
CASE HISTORY
A 34-year-old woman presents with increasingly heavy menstrual periods and an abdominal mass.
She is known to have uterine fibroids. She is due to get married next month and plans to start a
family soon. Several hormonal and non-hormonal medical treatments prescribed by her GP have
failed in the past 5 years.
A What questions would you ask in order to further explore the presenting complaint?
B What examination would you perform and what diagnostic tests would you perform or request?
C What medical treatments would you consider and explain why?
D What surgical or radiological treatments would you consider and explain why?
E Do you think she may be worried about anything in relation to her presenting complaint?
ANSWERS
A Assess the nature and severity of the menstrual bleeding (e.g. the chronicity of the symptoms, the
duration, regularity and amount [e.g. ‘flooding’ through sanitary protection] of menstrual loss and
the adverse impact on health-related quality of life [e.g. impact on work, social and emotional
relationships, physical and sexual functioning]). Establish whether there is any IMB or PCB that
may indicate cervical pathology. Enquire about dysmenorrhoea and whether this is primary,
spasmodic and short lived at the onset of menses or secondary lasting throughout the period, which
may suggest other gynaecological pathology especially if there is associated chronic pelvic pain.
Information relating to the pelvic mass should be obtained (e.g. when was it first noticed and how,
is it enlarging and/or causing bulk, pressure symptoms and how were uterine fibroids diagnosed?).
Fertility plans/desires should be established from the outset in addition to past ‘failed’ treatments
as this information will influence suitable management options.
Gastrointestinal causes such as irritable bowel syndrome or constipation should be considered
in light of her poor diet. A negative pregnancy test excludes an ectopic pregnancy. Genitourinary
problems such as bladder pain syndrome, musculoskeletal causes, neuropathic pain and
psychological contributors should be evaluated depending on the history and examination.
B A gynaecological examination should be undertaken to better characterize the nature and origin of
the mass; the size, regularity, mobility and tenderness of the mass should be determined.
Investigations to consider include a pelvic USS and possibly a MRI scan if the fibroids are large,
rapidly enlarging or morphologically abnormal on ultrasound. An endometrial biopsy is generally
unnecessary in women under 45 years of age unless they have risk factors for endometrial
hyperplasia (e.g. erratic cycles, obesity, polycystic ovaries). An outpatient hysteroscopy may be
indicated if submucosal fibroids are suspected or seen on radiological imaging.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

C As she plans to start a family soon, contraceptive hormonal treatments should be avoided although
may be used in the short term. Tranexamic acid and NSAIDs are good options although it is likely
these have already been tried, given the long-standing history. HMB in the presence of substantial
uterine fibroids are more resistant to medical treatments and so surgery should be considered.
D In this instance it should be fertility conserving so hysterectomy and endometrial ablation are
contraindicated. Myomectomy can be performed but as there is a small risk of emergency
hysterectomy because of severe intraoperative bleeding, this should probably be avoided unless
she is unable to conceive within a year of trying. In contrast, hysteroscopic myomectomy is
indicated if submucosal fibroids are detected as the operation is minimally invasive, can treat
HMB and can optimize subsequent fertility. UAE is another option, although the impact on
subsequent reproductive function remains unclear.
E She may be worried about the effect of fibroids on her fertility and subsequent pregnancy in view
of her forthcoming marriage. She may also be worried about the possibility of cancerous change if
she feels the uterine mass has increased in size.

EMQ
A Endometrial biopsy (EB).
B SIS.
C Outpatient hysteroscopy (OPH).
D TVUSS.
E TAUSS.
F MRI.
G Genital tract swabs.
H Laparoscopy.
I Computed tomography (CT) scan.
J Cervical smear.
K Colposcopy +/− cervical biopsy.
L Hysterosalpingogram (HSG).
For each description below, choose the SINGLE most appropriate answer from the above list of
options. Each option may be used once, more than once or not at all.
1 An obese, diabetic 49-year-old woman presenting with erratic, heavy and prolonged menstrual
bleeding.
2 A 32-year-old woman with IMB, subfertility and a suspected 2 cm endometrial polyp seen on
pelvic USS.
3 A 22-year-old virgin with HMB and a pelvic mass palpated on abdominal examination.
4 An obese 44-year-old woman with regular, heavy and painful menstrual bleeding and some PCB.
Examination of the genital tract appears normal and she has a normal and up-to-date cervical
smear history.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

5 A 32-year-old woman with a history of amenorrhoea and secondary subfertility since a postpartum
dilatation and curettage (D&C) for RPOC 2 years ago.
6 A 44-year-old woman considering a UAE for a 34 weeks sized fibroid uterus.
ANSWERS
1A This woman is at high risk for endometrial carcinoma. As per HMB guidelines and in view of
risk, EB is indicated. Other tests such as cervical smear, swabs and TVUSS may also be
necessary later, depending on the history.
2C The IMB is likely to be due to the polyp, which may also be affecting implantation. OPH will
afford direct vision and resection. SIS is not necessary as the polyp has been visualized already,
HSG is also unnecessary at this point.
3E Visualization of the uterus is necessary but TVUSS is not suitable as she is a virgin, and anyway
the mass is large. No further imaging such as CT or MRI is indicated yet, and would be
unnecessarily expensive and invasive. Operative procedures are not indicated here, nor are
smears, swabs or colposcopy.
4D Further examination of the cervix is unnecessary given her normal smear history. TVUSS is
required to image the uterus and the cervical structure. Swabs may prove necessary later,
depending on history. More expensive and invasive imaging such as MRI and CT are
unnecessary.
5C The history indicates an endometrial cause for the amenorrhoea. Although a TVUSS may show
scarring as a bright line in the endometrium and SIS may show an occluded endometrium, OPH
will afford the opportunity to treat any scarring by resection. It is therefore the most efficient next
step.
6F Prior to UAE a MRI is essential to identify the size and exact location of the fibroids, and to
ensure that the UAE is possible. TVUSS will also show very good identification of the fibroids,
but MRI is a better imaging modality to review specific fibroids at a later date.

SBA QUESTIONS
1 A parous 35-year-old woman complains of cyclical heavy and painful menstrual bleeding. On
examination she is found to have an enlarged, ‘boggy’ uterus and a TVUSS suggests the possibility
of adenomyosis. She has completed her family and currently relies on condoms for contraception.
She smokes 10 cigarettes per day but is otherwise fit and well. Which treatment would you
consider most appropriate? Choose the single best answer.
A LNG-IUS (Mirena®).
B COCP.
C Hysterectomy
D GnRH analogues.
E Endometrial ablation.
ANSWER
www.medicalebookpdf.com

A Although adenomyosis can only be definitively diagnosed following histological examination of
the uterus after hysterectomy, the history, examination and scan findings are suggestive of this
benign condition of the uterus. As she has completed her family a hysterectomy could be
considered, but this should not be considered a first-line treatment given its greater potential
morbidity. Any treatment that induces amenorrhoea will be helpful as it will render the ectopic
endometrium quiescent, relieving symptoms of pain and excessive bleeding. Local progestogen
treatment using the LNG-IUS can induce amenorrhoea and also provide more effective
contraception so seems the best option. GnRH analogues are not a long-term treatment and
endometrial ablation is primarily a treatment for HMB of endometrial origin in the absence of
other pathology.
2 Submucous fibroids are not associated with which of the following presentations? Choose the
single best answer.
A IMB.
B Subfertility.
C Pregnancy loss.
D HMB.
E Pressure and pain.
ANSWER
E Submucous fibroids are most commonly diagnosed when investigating abnormal uterine bleeding
or subfertility. Pressure and pain is not a feature of uterine fibroids confined to the uterine cavity
unless submucous fibroids coexist with other intramural and/or subserosal fibroids, leading to a
substantially enlarged uterus.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

www.medicalebookpdf.com

CHAPTER 13

Benign conditions of the vulva and vagina,
psychosexual disorders and female genital
mutilation
LEILA CG FRODSHAM

Anatomy and histology
Vulval overview
Assessment
Psychosexual medicine
How to approach consultations
Female genital mutilation
Further reading
Self assessment

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
• Describe the presentation and management of common benign conditions of the vulva and vagina.
• Describe the causes of superficial and deep dyspareunia.
• Understand the impact of vulval and vaginal conditions on sexual function.
• Understand the definition of psychosexual disorders.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• Describe the diagnosis, impact and management of psychosexual disorders.

Anatomy and histology
The vulva is the term used to describe the external female genitalia – the sexual organs. It includes the
labia majora and minor, clitoris and fourchette. The vulval vestibule is defined anatomically as the area
between the lower end of the vaginal canal at the hymenal ring and the labia minora. The different
anatomical areas of the external genitalia have different histological characteristics and embryological
origins. Both the labia minora and majora are covered with keratinized, pigmented, squamous epithelium.
The labia majora are two large folds of adipose tissue covered by skin containing hair follicles and
sebaceous and sweat glands. In contrast, the labia minora are devoid of adipose tissue and hair follicles,
but contain sebaceous follicles. The normal vulval vestibule is covered with non-keratinized, nonpigmented squamous epithelium and is devoid of skin adnexa. Within the vulval vestibule are the ducts of
the minor vestibular glands, the periurethral glands of Skene, the urethral meatus and the ducts of the
Bartholin’s glands. The Bartholin’s glands (major vestibular glands) are the major glands of the vestibule
and lie deep within the perineum. Both the major and the minor vestibular glands contain mucus-secreting
acini with ducts lined by transitional epithelium. The ducts of the Bartholin’s glands exit at the introitus
just above the fourchette at approximately five and seven o’clock on the perineum, and those of the minor
vestibular glands are distributed throughout the vulval vestibule. The vagina and vulva are commonly
known as the lower genital tract with the vagina leading to the upper genital tract (uterus, cervix, tubes
and ovaries). The vagina has is a tubular structure but has anterior and posterior walls that lie in
opposition.
Vulval skin has different physiological properties when compared to other regions of the body such as
the forearm. Transepidermal water loss is twice the amount in vulval skin compared to forearm skin. This
suggests that the stratum corneum, the protective layer of vulval skin, functions poorly as a skin barrier
when compared to other skin areas and may explain why vulval skin is more prone to irritancy.

Vulval overview
Benign vulval conditions have a far ranging impact on women’s health and lifestyles and yet there are a
dearth of clinicians able to provide a holistic approach to care. Approximately 20% of women will have
vulval symptoms such as itching, skin changes or pain at any time. Effective management of vulval
diseases incorporates skills in dermatology, oncology, infectious diseases and psychosexual medicine.
Current training in these areas for gynaecologists are scanty and so women are at best seen in vulval
clinics with a multidisciplinary team (MDT) approach. At worst, they may be passed between primary,
secondary and tertiary care feeling increasingly frustrated and disgruntled that no one seems to understand
or be able to help them. In turn, this can make the speciality less appealing to clinicians. The recent
survey, Tomorrow’s Specialist, by the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG)
suggests that women expect psychosexual, dermatological and surgical skills from their gynaecologist
and, while this chapter does not aim to cover all these areas in detail, it is hoped to give an overview in
the management of these cases in order that a sole clinician can manage the majority of cases themselves.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Of course, there will always be cases where tertiary care is required, but the bulk should remain in
primary and secondary care.

Assessment
A full history and clinical examination (with optional vaginal swabs and biopsies) are essential to make
the diagnosis. Vulval skin is an extension of general skin surfaces and it is important in the history to ask
about general skin problems as this might point towards the diagnosis; for example, psoriasis or eczema
can synchronously affect the vulva and the limbs. The history should focus on the presenting complaint. It
is important to discuss current methods of skin care (e.g. use of scented products that can aggravate
symptoms), which topical treatments are being used (e.g. some creams such as antifungals can aggravate
the problem) and the impact of the symptoms on sexual functioning. The clinical examination should
include all skin surfaces and the vulval area should be examined systematically with a good light source.
Vulval pruritus, pain and superficial dyspareunia are common symptoms and Table 13.1 illustrates the
differential diagnoses of different symptoms, although this is not an exhaustive list. Confusingly for the
clinician, most patients have more than one symptom.

Vulval itching (pruritis) and discomfort
The most common presenting symptoms of benign vulval conditions are itching, discomfort, pain,
discharge and dyspareunia (painful sex). Women with vulval disease present at all ages but there is a
preponderance of postmenopausal women with benign dermatological conditions. This group particularly
lend themselves to a polypharmacy, as pathology may have multiple aetiologies (e.g. atrophic vaginitis
and vulvitis or lichen sclerosus), and a more holistic approach. Women in this age group may be
disinclined to seek advice early and sexual dysfunction is already more common in both women and their
partners. Additionally, this patient group can feel very ‘alone’ with their disease and can really benefit
from joining support groups that run regular educational workshops such as the Vulval Pain Society.

Table 13.1 Differential diagnosis of vulval complaints
Vulval pruritus

Vulval pain

Superficial dyspareunia

Infections (e.g. candidiasis,
Trichomonas vaginalis)

Infections (e.g. candidiasis)

Skin conditions (e.g. lichen
sclerosus [causes vulval splitting])

Skin conditions (e.g. lichen
sclerosis, eczema, VIN)

Skin conditions (e.g. lichen
sclerosis, eczema, VIN)

Vulvodynia

Contact dermatitis

Vulvodynia

Vulval fissures

Bartholin gland infection

Skin bridges of the vulva

VIN, vulval intraepithelial neoplasia.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Older women can be particularly distressed by pruritis and can be mortified to find their partners
woken by their nocturnal involuntary itching. As a result of nocturnal itching some women can present
with dysuria as urine burns their excoriated vulval skin and the gross pathology can look alarming. It is
also important to consider the effects of both urinary and faecal incontinence as this can damage the skin
barrier function and form a vulval dermatitis in itself.

Reduction in allergens
The appearance of vulval dermatitis is often not specific and is strongly associated with a history of atopy
and other dermatoses. It is therefore prudent to reduce allergens in all patients presenting with symptoms
of vulval pruritis.
It is advisable to discourage women from washing with any soaps or detergents (including feminine
washes), which disrupt the bacterial balance of the vagina and can cause a vulval dermatitis. Water is
preferable but some women find olive (or other natural unperfumed) oils offer moisturization and a better
clean. Women who wish to have a scented, moisturizing bath can use either similar oils with a few drops
of tea tree oil.
Women should be encouraged to wear cotton underwear (with minimal dyes) and wash clothing with
an unperfumed non-biological washing powder/fabric conditioner. It is also worth considering the effect
of sanitary protection/pads for urinary incontinence. It is not uncommon to see women who have marked
vulval dermatitis from popular sanitary brands (particularly the super-thin gel-filled variety of sanitary
towel) and they may benefit from sourcing unbleached, organic protection, washable pads or the ‘Moon
Cup’.

Recurrent use of antifungals
Women will frequently both self-source and be prescribed multiple courses of antifungals such as
clotrimazole cream and pessaries, often without examination. While this can soothe in the initial stages, it
can precipitate a hypersensitivity reaction that increases symptoms, and yet women feel obliged to use
what is offered as the ‘doctor is the expert’ and their symptoms, are so distressing.
The vulval and vaginal condition of candidal infection or ‘thrush’ is common and particularly affects
women of reproductive age (or using hormone replacement therapy, HRT) where oestrogen levels are
high (and there is an increased prevalence in pregnancy). It is uncommon in prepubescent girls and
postmenopausal women and other causes for irritation should be sought rather than relying on readily
available antifungals. Hypo-oestrogenic women, therefore, should be checked for other causes of itching
and examined before prescription of antifungals. It is very important to consider diabetes as a cause of
recurrent thrush. Once excluded, a genuine case of candidal infection should be treated with a course of
150 mg clotrimazole nightly over 3 consecutive nights. In menstruating women this is most useful
postmenstrually when candida is more common due to alteration of the vaginal pH. Oral fluconazole is a
second-line treatment after clotrimozole. A combination of reduction of allergens and the above is
sufficient in most cases. It is unnecessary to treat partners unless they have symptoms themselves and
there is no proven benefit in doing so. A referral to genitourinary medicine (sexual health) can be of great
benefit in recurrent cases of treatment-resistant candida.

Low ferritin
www.medicalebookpdf.com

About 5% of women with vulval pruritis may have low ferritin and correction of this will improve
symptoms, so it should always be checked in the early stages.

Biopsy in vulval disease
Biopsy should only be performed in first-line treatment if there is a concern regarding malignancy. If there
is a diffuse leukoplakia or erythema, treatment with steroids and emollients is recommended and, if
symptoms do not resolve, biopsy should be considered. The Keyes punch biopsy is a 4-mm sample of
skin that can be taken under local anaesthetic in the clinic (Figure 13.1). A pathology sample allows an
accurate diagnosis to be made and the correct treatment to be instigated. Biopsies should be carried out
when there is a pigmented lesion, a raised or indurated area and a persistent ulcer.

Lichen planus
Lichen planus is an autoimmune disorder affecting 1–2% of the population (particularly in people over
40) and affects the skin, genitalia and oral and gastrointestinal mucosa. There is no known precipitating
factor although pressure can increase symptoms (for example restrictive underwear), but symptoms are
often pruritis and/or superficial dyspareunia. Lesions in the mouth may be reticular-like cobwebs, and
oral inspection should be performed if the diagnosis is suspected. Lesions can occur on the shins and
there can be characteristic appearances to the nail bed such as longitudinal ridging and sandpaper effect.
Genital lesions can be longitudinal, annular, ulcerative, hyperpigmented or bullous and may cause
vaginal stenosis and resulting sexual dysfunction. Treatment is by high-dose topical steroids. Sexual
dysfunction is common due to pain and stenosis. If there is a vaginal stenosis, it is preferable to try
dilatation with manual (fingers or dilators) rather than surgical means in the first instance.

Figure 13.1 Keyes punch biopsy.

Lichen sclerosus
Lichen sclerosus is a destructive inflammatory skin condition that affects mainly the anogenital area of
women. It is believed to affect 1 in 300 women and the cause is believed to be autoimmune. Many
patients have other autoimmune conditions, such as thyroid disease and pernicious anaemia. The
www.medicalebookpdf.com

destructive nature of the condition is due to underlying inflammation in the subdermal layers of the skin,
which results in hyalinization of the skin. This leads to a fragility and white ‘parchment paper’
appearance of the skin and loss of vulval anatomy. The condition can involve the foreskin of men to
produce a phimosis. Lichen sclerosus is evident elsewhere on the body in 15% of patients. The main
symptoms on the vulva are itching and subsequent soreness of the vulva, usually due to scratching. A
biopsy can confirm the diagnosis and treatment is a combination of good skin care and strong steroid
ointments such as those containing clobetasol. Lichen sclerosus is associated with vulval cancer, but is
not a cause. Many women with vulval cancer have lichen sclerosis at the time of diagnosis and it is
estimated that there is a low risk of cancer developing in a women with lichen sclerosus (around 3–5%).
Lichen sclerosus characteristically presents in a ‘figure of 8’ pattern around the vulva and anus. There
is frequently hypopigmentation, loss of anatomy, vaginal stenosis and cracking (particularly in the
posterior fourchette) but appearances can be subtle in early-stage disease (Figure 13.2). Treatment of
both lichen planus and sclerosus is by high-dose topical steroids (clobetasol proprionate), applying a
pea-sized amount daily for 1 month, alternate days for the second month and twice a week for the third
month. If there is not complete resolution of symptoms, biopsy is indicated. Women should be advised to
seek advice if the lesions become raised or resistant to treatment. Once the course of treatment is
completed, the steroid cream can be used by women as and when required.

Vulval cysts
Bartholin’s cysts, Skene gland cysts and mucous inclusion cysts can affect the vulval area and cause a
lump with or without vulval discomfort. If they do not cause the patient any problem, they can be either
monitored or excised. A Bartholin’s cyst is the most common type of cyst and develops in the region of the
Bartholin’s gland (Figure 13.3). The Bartholin’s gland has a long duct which, when blocked, causes fluid
to build up and eventually forms a cyst. It is not uncommon for these cysts to get infected and cause a
Bartholin’s abscess that usually presents acutely and may require incision and drainage. Marsupialization
of the cyst is the term used when the internal aspect of the cyst is sutured to the outside of the cyst to
create a window so that the cyst does not reform. Marsupialization of Bartholin’s cysts is usually an
elective procedure under general or spinal anaesthesia. Outpatient drainage is also possible, sometimes
followed by the insertion of a tiny catheter into the incision, which remains in place for several weeks to
maintain its patency.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 13.2 Lichen sclerosus.

Vulvodynia
Vulvodynia is the condition of pain on the vulva most often described as a burning pain, occurring in the
absence of skin disease or infection. It is akin to a neuropathic pain syndrome. The pain can be further
classified by the anatomical site (e.g. generalized, localized or clitoral) and also by whether pain is
provoked or unprovoked. Vulvodynia can occur at any age, and causes huge distress to sufferers. It is
essential to exclude physical causes such as dermatitis. The Vulval Pain Society can be an invaluable
source of information and support for sufferers. There is recent evidence that neuromodulators are of
limited benefit in vulvodynia but some women find them useful (particularly if pain inhibits sleep, when a
sedative neuromodulator such as amitrytiline can be used).

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 13.3 Bartholin’s cyst.
It is important to take a detailed history about the onset of symptoms and the timing and relation to the
sexual history. Women with vulvodynia may have primary or secondary psychosexual dysfunction as
described below. Some women can benefit from perineal massage, which may aid vulval desensitization,
reduce muscular spasm and reassociate women with their own genitalia. Oils (such as coconut) may act
as a barrier to precipitating factors (allergens, chafing from sports or clothing) and enable better
lubrication for sexual function. While this can be initiated on guidance from a gynaecologist, the women’s
health physiotherapists are doing invaluable work and research in this area and there should be a low
threshold for referral in this patient group.
Many women with vulvodynia will see multiple clinicians and have tried conventional and alternative
therapies with no resolution of symptoms until they have worked on a combination of perineal massage
and consideration of their feelings surrounding the diagnosis and their relationships. Women need support
to regain their sex lives. Ideally this should be by someone who appreciates the physical and
psychosexual aspects of their pain, not a ‘specialist’ but a health care professional with an empathetic ear
who is able to work with the patient. A management of symptoms rather than complete resolution of pain
is most realistic.

Patient insight
‘For 8 years I have felt that I am not living my life but managing my pain on a daily basis. I have
seen numerous specialists, used every possible cream and tablet and felt like a disappointment to
doctors who want to help me to get better but can’t. In recent months my pain patch has reduced,
www.medicalebookpdf.com

my sex life improved and I can see that one day, like a butterfly, it will just fly away’. Vulvodynia
sufferer.

Dyspareunia
Dyspareunia is defined as pain during sexual intercourse. Dyspareunia may be associated with many
gynaecological problems and is described as superficial or deep, the latter sometimes associated with
pathology such as endometriosis or pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). On many occasions, despite
appropriate investigations, no cause can be found and psychological support should be offered.

Dyspareunia
• Definition: pain during or after sexual intercourse, which can be classified as superficial affecting
the vagina, clitoris or labia, or deep with pain experienced within the pelvis.
• Epidemiology: the estimated prevalence is between 10% and 20%, although this may be an
underestimate as many women may not present. Risk factors include female genital mutilation
(FGM), suspected PID and endometriosis, peri/postmenopausal status, depression or anxiety states
and history of sexual assault.
• Clinical evaluation:
• the clinical history should explore the nature and onset of pain, the relationship to intercourse,
associated chronic pelvic pain symptoms, reproductive and past medical history. A pyschosexual
history should be considered especially for superficial dyspareunia;
• abdominal and pelvic examination should look for lower genital tract lesions (e.g. skin disorder,
scarring, anatomical abnormality), vaginismus (involuntary contraction of vaginal muscles during
vaginal examination), areas of tenderness within the lower and upper genital tract and evidence of
pelvic disease (masses, tenderness, fixity of organs).
• Investigations:
• superficial dyspareunia: consider a biopsy of lower genital tract lesions and swabs;
• deep dyspareunia: consider transvaginal ultrasound scan (TVUSS), swabs and laparoscopy.
• Treatment:
• superficial dyspareunia: treat any identifiable cause;
• deep dyspareunia: treat as for chronic pelvic pain.

Psychosexual medicine
Psychosexual problems may be primary or secondary.

Psychosexual dysfunction
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• Primary psychosexual dysfunction describes sexual difficulties where there may be psychosomatic
pain.
• Secondary psychosexual dysfunction describes sexual difficulties resulting from pain or emotional
issues.

How to approach consultations
Vulval disorders are invariably linked with female (and occasionally secondary male) sexual dysfunction.
Whether primary or secondary, and regardless of the aetiology, it is important to explore this in the
consultation.
The Institute of Psychosexual Medicine uses the LOFTI model to aid with consultation.

The LOFTI model
Listening
• Open questions and periods of silence allow the patient to divulge and elaborate on essential
information.
• What is their tone/style of language?
• What is/is not said? How and when?
Observing
• Patterns of behaviour (e.g. frequent cancellations/avoidance of appointments).
• Urgency, demeanour, style of dress and mannerisms.
• Referral letters from the general practitioner (GP) may be detailed and pressurized, emphasizing the
urgency of the referral (an example of transference, the unconscious redirection of feelings from the
patient to the GP).
Feelings
• Be aware of feelings in the room.
• How does the patient make you feel?
• Feelings aroused in any doctor by the patient’s language, behaviour and the attitude of the doctor to
the patient are seen as possible evidence of the patient’s own less than conscious feelings.
Thinking
• Note what sort of doctor you are being in the consultation – a parent? Teacher?
• Why is the patient presenting now? How did the patient come to have the consultation/what is their
motivation?
• Note how you feel before and after the consultation.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Interpreting
• Assess the overall picture – is the patient displaying certain types of behaviour or attitude as a
defence mechanism or a means of hiding anxiety or fear such as tears or anger?
• Defence mechanisms include regression, dissociation, introjection, sublimation or denial.
• What do you notice from genital examination? Is there avoidance (i.e. patients menstruating at every
appointment or always having difficulties with smears)?

Vaginismus and non-consummation
Vaginismus cases are often some of the most challenging for both gynaecologists and psychosexual
therapists. Vaginismus can lead to non-consummation and all gynaecologists should appreciate the huge
impact of such sexual dysfunction on their patients’ relationships and lives.
There is often a pressure of time (fertility or relationship issues), in addition to the patients concerns
about a physical anomaly, that may lead the gynaecologist to a physical intervention such as a Fenton’s
procedure. While this may satisfy a short-term desire for a patient to widen what appears to be an
impossibly small hole, it very rarely succeeds in providing an answer to non-consummation and the
underlying vaginismus that will defeat the partner from penetration.

Patient insight
‘Please will you just drive something through the blockage whilst I’m asleep so my husband can
get in there?’ Patient with non-consummation.
Traditionally, both doctors and sex therapists have used vaginal dilators to enable the woman to
‘overcome her blockage’ but they often become very adept at satisfying the doctor in going up the sizes
but, anecdotally, rarely translate this into sexual activity. Although frequently prescribed, the use of
dilators has no proven benefit and the evidence in favour of their use remains anecdotal, without evidence
of efficacy if there is no physical pathology. More research is needed in this area.

Patient insight
‘He gave me vaginal dilators, but when I used them it felt like an extension on the doctors fingers
and got me no closer to having sex with my husband’. Vaginismus patient.
Practitioners undertaking psychosexual training will begin to recognize the transference of the
partner’s feelings onto themselves and a drive to open the vagina and achieve penetration that may exhibit
itself subconsciously as a frustration and irritation with the patient. Additionally, they may feel inhibited
from examining women with vaginismus and willingly accept the ‘everlasting period’ as a means of
avoiding examination as a result of the patient’s fear of the vagina and thus examination. In addition, this
may further lead to a temptation to provide an examination under anaesthesia and manual dilation, which
may positively reinforce the patient’s perception of a physical issue that might eventually lead to further
unnecessary surgery.
Women with vaginismus may make the most progress with a professional who is able to address the
physical concerns by psychological ‘flooding’ (for example paying close attention to wording and action).
Instead of responding to ‘too small’ by using the small speculum and thereby positively reinforcing the
www.medicalebookpdf.com

phantasy, examination might be performed with the patient involved, for example using a mirror, allowing
them control during the examination and encouraging self-exploration at home with perineal massage and
stretching of the vagina with their or their partner’s fingers. The practitioner will always question the
patient’s reluctance to engage with their own genitalia because ultimately this might precipitate disclosure
of a phantasy (physical fantasy). Genital examination may lead to the ‘moment of truth’ in consultation
where the patient recognizes the influence of the mind over the body in their sexual problem. It is often
tempting to reassure patients that their anatomy is normal, but more powerful to encourage them to see and
feel that themselves.
Additionally, women with vaginismus are covertly in control of their sex lives (although this is largely
subconscious in both partners). Empowering them to to recognize this and take overt control, by
encouraging them to tell their partners that penetrative sex is ‘off the menu’ for a specified period of time,
can be therapeutic. This is called modified sensate focus, and might help them to enable penetration when
in combination with perineal massage and exploration of their subconscious defences (for example
always wearing fleece pyjamas to bed, or avoiding the same bed time).
In summary, it is advisable to use the consultation to recognize and reflect the patient’s anxieties and
consider carefully whether surgery is the best option. The Institute of Psychosexual Medicine does not
aim to turn doctors and allied health professionals into experts on sexual dysfunction, but to refine their
skills to enable them to see that the patient is the expert, who has the answers but requires a ‘professional
mirror’ to see them. All health professionals act as chameleons in consultation (for example, they adapt
their tone of voice, body language or demeanour), but those trained in psychosexual medicine also
recognize what is coming from the patient, and reflect it back.

Female genital mutilation
There are four degrees of FGM practiced in different geographical areas as shown in Figures 13.4, 13.5.
Widely regarded in Western countries as a barbaric and unacceptable procedure, the prevalence remains
extremely high with physical, psychological and social ramifications. The World Health Organization
(WHO)’s position on FGM is shown below. FGM is frequently performed in girls from the age of 8
onwards without analgesia or adequate sterility.
FGM is defined as: ‘Any procedure involving partial or total removal of the external genitalia
and/or injury to the female genital organs whether for cultural, religious or other non-therapeutic
reasons’ (WHO 2006).
FGM is a practice that has far reaching implications to women’s health in the acute and chronic
timeframe. The implications are physical, psychological and psychosexual and may, in the worst case
scenario, lead to renal failure from urinary obstruction and infection. There is now a legal obligation in
the UK to document all cases in the medical notes and report all cases through the safeguarding team in
NHS Trusts to reduce the incidence of this practice in young girls and women in the UK. In cases where
FGM is suspected in minors, this is classified as child sexual abuse and social services and the police
should be involved.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 13.4 Types of female genital mutilation.

Figure 13.5 Geographical distribution of female genital mutilation. (Adapted from UNICEF 2013 data.)
The four main types of FGM are shown in Figure 13.4:
• Type 1 Clitoroidectomy: excision of prepuce (clitoral hood) with or without the removal of the clitoris.
• Type 2 Excision of clitoris and partial or total removal of the labia minora.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• Type 3 Excision of part or all of the external genitalia and stitching/narrowing of the vagina –
infundibulation.
• Type 4 Piercing the clitoris, cauterization, cutting the vagina, inserting corrosive substances. This also
includes any plastic surgery procedures done as an adult.
There is often an extremely fine line between cosmetic surgery on the vulva and FGM and the
gynaecologist must seek advice before considering such procedures. Prevalence of requests for
labioplasty procedures have risen dramatically in recent years (possibly as a result of accessibility of
pornography and ‘photoshopping’ on the web) and many health care providers have withdrawn funding
for such procedures on the NHS. This has, in turn, increased private practice in this area, which may offer
less vigorous support for the emotionally vulnerable patient. Pre- and postsurgery patients are now
attending NHS psychosexual medicine clinics for help with sexual dysfunction either related to body
dysmorphia or side-effects of surgery. A useful tool for women to use is ‘The Great Wall of Vagina’, by
Jamie McCartney, a British artist who has taken hundreds of plaster casts of vulvas. Women are often
pleasantly surprised to see how ‘normal’ their vulva is after looking at this.
It is difficult for UK gynaecologists to appreciate the cultural context of FGM, particularly when
working in areas where it is infrequently seen. The novel ‘Possessing the Secret of Joy’ by Alice Walker
is an essential read for gynaecologists interested in the impact of FGM on women and the cultural
influences behind the practice. The main character chooses FGM after puberty to feel more ‘in tune with
her culture’ and eloquently describes the emotional and physical impact of her decision.
The obstetrician must be alert to form a plan for such patients in labour and delivery in hospital is
advised with a clear plan of care detailed. It is not fully known whether labour is obstructed in these
women from the evidence to date, but is certainly a possibility in Type 3 FGM. Depending on the type of
FGM, it may be necessary to perform midline episiotomy for safe delivery. However, what is far
preferable is to enquire early in the pregnancy and refer to a specialist centre for deinfundibulation. It is
illegal to resuture (which many women request) an FGM.

Reversal of infundibulation (deinfundibulation)
Ideally women should be identified preconceptually and sent to a specialist centre but can be managed
antenatally. It should be rare that women are managed on the labour ward, as all women felt to be at risk
should be identified by their booking midwives and, if this is the case, a senior obstetrician should be
present.
Deinfundibulation should be performed with adequate analgesia to avoid flashbacks to the FGM
procedure (local anaesthetic can be used but may distort anatomy). The incision should be made along the
vulval incision scar and the urethra identified before surgery commences to reduce damage. All women
should have prior urinary infection screening and given appropriate antibiotic therapy, as bladder
obstruction and urinary infection rates are high. A fine absorbable suture should be used and prophylactic
antibiotics considered.
It should not be assumed that both sexual dysfunction and emotional distress is resolved by
deinfundibulation and specialist centres will be able more adequately to access specialist services and
support groups for affected women.

KEY LEARNING POINTS
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• Women with vulval disease often present late with extensive and debilitating disease that affects
their daily lives and intimate relationships.
• Vulval disease may cause pruritis and good skin care and steroid treatment may help.
• Biopsy may aid diagnosis and exclude malignancy.
• Dyspareunia is described as deep or superficial.
• Patients with psychosexual disorders are often frustrated and angry and so may feel ‘difficult’ to
manage, but provide an opportunity to use the skills that all gynaecologists possess in a holistic
manner to help them improve symptoms, live with their disease and achieve a satisfactory sexual
life.
• FGM is frequently performed on girls worldwide, and it is essential to recognize and offer
deinfundibulation.

Further reading
British Association for Sexual Health and HIV UK National Guideline on the Management of Vulval
Conditions 2014.
McEwan I (2007). On Chesil Beach. Jonathan Cape.
Royal College of Gynaecologists and Obstetricians. Female Genital Mutilation and its Management
(Green-top Guideline No. 53) 2015.
Skrine R, Montford H. Psychosexual Medicine: An Introduction, 2nd Edition. Hodder Arnold, 2001.
Walker A (1992). Possessing the Secret of Joy. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Useful websites:
The Institute of Psychosexual Medicine
www.ipm.org.uk
College of Sexual and Relationship Therapies
www.cosrt.co.uk
www.csp.org.uk

Self assessment
CASE HISTORY
A 25-year-old woman has been seen by her community midwife and disclosed previous ‘cutting’.
The midwife has urgently referred her to your antenatal clinic. She is now 28 weeks pregnant.
What are the next steps that you should take?

www.medicalebookpdf.com

ANSWERS
Initial examination is helpful to determine the degree of FGM (1–4) as this will affect the
management initially and of labour. The safe guarding team must be aware, and it essential that
documentation, dated and timed, is present in the notes. These are legal requirements. Ensure that a
translator is available if necessary for all visits. Depending on the type of FGM, midline episiotomy
in labour may be necessary. Early deinfundibulation is preferable. Suturing postdelivery should be
performed by a senior obstetrician. In the UK it is illegal to perform restoration of the FGM, even on
request.

SBA QUESTIONS
1 A 36-year-old obese woman presents with recurrent thrush, increased thirst and frequency of
urination. What test is essential in this case? Choose the single best answer.
A Serum ferritin.
B High vaginal swab.
C Vulval biopsy.
D Fasting blood glucose.
E Skin prick allergy testing.
ANSWER
D There is a association of diabetes and recurrent candida, due to the increased serum glucose. This
patient has symptoms of diabetes as well as risk factor.
2 A 30-year-old woman presents with her partner unable to consummate her marriage. She asks you
to assist her in achieving penetrative penile sex.
What should be your first step? Choose the single best answer.
A Prescribe dilators and advise her to watch the instruction film.
B Book examination and dilation under general anaesthetic.
C Book her for a Fenton’s procedure under general anaesthetic.
D Arrange Botox injections to the perineal musculature.
E Perform examination and encourage flooding.
ANSWER
E Invasive investigations or treatments are unhelpful and can be damaging. Vaginal dilators have
been shown to have little benefit in this circumstance. Psychosexual management is much more
effective for this couple.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

www.medicalebookpdf.com

CHAPTER 14

Malignant disease of the ovary
EMMA J CROSBIE

Introduction
Ovarian cancers
Epithelial tumours
Primary peritoneal carcinoma
Sex cord stromal tumours
Germ cell tumours
Further reading
Self assessment

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
• Learn how malignant disease of the ovary, Fallopian tube and peritoneum presents.
• Learn how ovarian cancer is investigated and staged.
• Learn how ovarian cancer is managed.

Introduction
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Ovarian cancer is the second most common gynaecological malignancy and the major cause of death from
gynaecological cancer in the UK. There are approximately 7,000 new cases and 4,000 deaths from
ovarian cancer per year. When detected in its early stages, ovarian cancer has an excellent prognosis. The
dismal overall survival rates from ovarian cancer reflect the advanced stage at which most women
present. Screening has not been shown to be effective and there have been few advances in the
development of targeted treatments for advanced disease.

Ovarian cancers
Incidence
The lifetime risk of developing ovarian cancer in the general population is 1.4% (1 in 70), and the mean
age of presentation is 64 years. Ovarian cancer is more prevalent in higher income nations. There are
variations in incidence with ethnicity; white women have the highest incidence at approximately 14 per
100,000, whereas Asian women have a lower incidence at 10 per 100,000. Ovarian cancer is rare in
young women and only 3% of ovarian cancers occur in women under 35 years. It is now increasingly
accepted that a large proportion of ovarian cancers may in fact originate in the Fallopian tube, rather than
the ovarian surface epithelium as previously thought. There is a significant genetic aspect to ovarian
cancer (see below). It is recognized that women with hereditary cancer present early, with a mean age at
diagnosis of 54 years.

Classification of ovarian cancer
Primary ovarian cancers are epithelial (80%), sex cord stromal or germ cell. The ovary is also a common
site for metastatic spread; Krukenberg tumours are ovarian metastases associated with primary cancers of
the colon, stomach and breast. Table 14.1 shows a histological classification of ovarian tumours.

Table 14.1 Histological classification of malignant ovarian tumours

1 Epithelial ovarian tumours (80%)

High-grade serous
Endometrioid
Clear cell
Mucinous
Low-grade serous
(Borderline)

2 Sex cord stromal tumours (10%)

Granulosa cell
Sertoli–Leydig
Gynandroblastoma

3 Germ cell tumours (10%)

Dysgerminoma
Endodermal sinus (yolk sac)
Teratoma
Choriocarcinoma
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Mixed
4 Metastatic (including Krukenberg tumours)

Epithelial tumours
Epithelial tumours of the ovary can be benign, malignant or borderline. Approximately 10% of epithelial
tumours are classified as borderline ovarian tumours (BOTs). These tumours are well differentiated, with
some features of malignancy (nuclear pleomorphism, cellular atypia) but do not invade the basement
membrane. BOTs spread to other abdominopelvic structures (peritoneum, omentum) but do not often recur
following initial surgery. The majority of BOTs are serous tumours. Mucinous BOTs may actually arise
from appendiceal carcinomas of low malignant potential and can be associated with pseudomyxoma
peritoneii.
High-grade serous carcinomas account for around 75% of all epithelial ovarian cancers; mucinous and
endometrioid tumours are less common, accounting for 10%, followed by clear cell carcinomas. Highgrade serous tumours are characterized histologically by concentric rings of calcification, known as
‘psammoma bodies’. Mucinous carcinomas are generally large multiloculated tumours associated with
pseudomyxoma peritoneii. Endometrioid carcinomas are similar in histological appearance to
endometrial cancer, are associated with endometriosis in approximately 10% of cases and also a
synchronous separate endometrial cancer in 10–15%. They tend to be well differentiated and are
associated with a better survival than high-grade serous carcinomas. Clear cell carcinomas can also arise
from endometriosis and are characterized histologically by clear cells, much like renal cancer.

Aetiology and risk factors
Epithelial ovarian cancers include a heterogeneous group of tumours of different histological subtypes
and aetiologies that affect the ovary, Fallopian tube and peritoneum.

High-grade pelvic serous carcinomas
Because most high-grade pelvic serous carcinomas present with advanced disease involving the ovary,
Fallopian tube and peritoneal surfaces, it is often impossible to establish the anatomical site of origin.
Assigning primary tumour site is of little clinical relevance anyway since the behaviour, prognosis and
treatment of these tumours are identical. Thus the term high-grade pelvic serous carcinoma has been
coined to incorporate all high-grade serous tumours arising from the ovary, Fallopian tube and/or
peritoneum. Data from women with BRCA mutations who have undergone risk-reducing prophylactic
bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (BSO) suggest a Fallopian tubal precursor lesion for high-grade pelvic
serous tumours. These precursors are called serous tubal intraepithelial carcinoma (STIC) lesions, and
they are characterized by mutations in p53 in secretory cells of the distal Fallopian tube. As many as 30%
of high-grade pelvic serous cancers have BRCA mutations, which has implications for the majority of
women who present with apparently sporadic disease.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Endometrioid, mucinous, clear cell, borderline and low-grade serous
ovarian carcinomas
Inclusion cysts of the ovarian surface epithelium and endometriosis give rise to neoplasms that are
distinctly ovarian in origin, and can include mucinous, endometrioid, clear cell, borderline and low-grade
serous carcinomas. Endometriosis-associated ovarian cancers are usually of endometrioid or clear cell
histological subtype. The origin of these tumours involves driver mutations in KRAS, PTEN, BRAF and
ARID1A rather than TP53. The clinical distinction between high-grade pelvic serous carcinomas and
other histological subtypes is important because of differences in disease progression, response to
chemotherapy and prognosis.

Table 14.2 Risk factors in ovarian cancer

BRCA mutation carrier status is a risk factor for high-grade serous ovarian cancer. Most ovarian
cancers, however, are sporadic and risk relates to reproductive factors that are associated with hormone
treatment, contraceptive use, ovulation and pregnancy (Table 14.2). The ‘incessant ovulation’ theory holds
that the repeated damage to the ovarian surface epithelium that occurs at ovulation increases the risk of
mutations that drive ovarian carcinogenesis. Excess gonadotrophin secretion is also thought to drive
tumorigenesis through oestrogen-stimulated epithelial proliferation and subsequent malignant
transformation.

Genetic factors in ovarian cancer
It is estimated that at least 10–15% of women with epithelial ovarian cancer have a hereditary
predisposition. Women with mutations in BRCA1, BRCA2 and Lynch syndrome have an increased lifetime
risk of epithelial ovarian cancer. The lifetime risk in the general population is one in 70 (1.4%). This
rises to 1 in 20 (5%) if women have one family member affected by a defect in one of these genes and
further increases to 40–50% if two first-degree relatives are affected. Hereditary cancers usually occur
around 10 years before sporadic cancers and are associated with other cancers (particularly of the breast,
colon and rectum).
The most common hereditary cancer is the breast ovarian cancer syndrome (BRCA), accounting for
90% of the hereditary cancers. This syndrome is due to a mutation of tumour suppressor genes BRCA1
www.medicalebookpdf.com

(80%) and BRCA2 (15%). Lynch syndrome is hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) and
is associated with endometrial cancer and a 10% lifetime risk of ovarian cancer. Hereditary ovarian
cancers tend to be adenocarcinomas, present in later stages with the exception of Lynch-associated
tumours, and recent evidence supports improved survival, probably due to a better response to platinum
chemotherapy.

Preventing ovarian cancer
Women who test positive for a BRCA mutation are offered risk-reducing prophylactic BSO when they
have completed their families. This can usually be performed laparoscopically. Prophylactic surgery
reduces the risk of ovarian cancer (by 90%) and premenopausal breast cancer (by 50%), although it does
not eliminate the risk of primary peritoneal cancer. It is important to carry out risk-reducing surgery prior
to the age-related surge in ovarian cancer observed in BRCA mutation carriers, which is younger in
BRCA1 (mid 30s) than BRCA2 patients (early 40s). Another suggestion for risk reduction builds on the
theory that BRCA-associated ovarian cancers actually originate in the Fallopian tube; hence performing
bilateral salpingectomy with delayed oophorectomy in the 30s and early 40s may offset the morbidity
associated with a surgical menopause in young women while reducing the risk of cancer. This strategy has
yet to be subjected to rigorous testing and its efficacy is unknown. Recent data indicate that the
opportunistic removal of the Fallopian tubes during hysterectomy for benign indications also reduces
ovarian cancer risk in women at average lifetime risk of ovarian cancer. Other procedures associated
with ovarian cancer risk reduction include tubal ligation (sterilization) and hysterectomy with ovarian
conservation. Chemoprevention using the combined oral contraceptive pill (COCP) reduces ovarian
cancer risk by up to 50% in both BRCA mutation carriers and women at average risk of ovarian cancer.

Screening
Screening using transvaginal ultrasound scan (TVUSS) and CA125 measurement has not been shown to
improve survival in women with a familial predisposition to ovarian cancer. This is because the highgrade serous tumours that are associated with BRCA mutation carrier status develop rapidly and most are
at an advanced stage before they can be picked up by screening. The role of screening for women of
average lifetime risk of ovarian cancer remains unclear; further results from the population-based
UKCTOCS randomized controlled trial are awaited, as the 2015 initial data were equivocal.

Clinical features
Most women with ovarian cancer have symptoms; however, these symptoms are non-specific and often
vague. The difficulty with clinical diagnosis is the main reason that patients with ovarian cancer present
with late stage disease (66% present with stage 3 disease or greater), and this has a dramatic effect on
survival. The most common symptoms are:
• Increased abdominal girth/bloating.
• Persistent pelvic and abdominal pain.
• Difficulty eating and feeling full quickly.
Other symptoms such as change in bowel habit, urinary symptoms, back ache, irregular bleeding and
fatigue occur frequently and any women with persistence of these symptoms should be assessed by their
www.medicalebookpdf.com

general practitioner (GP).
Pelvic and abdominal examination may reveal a fixed, hard mass arising from the pelvis. The
differential diagnosis of a pelvic mass includes non-epithelial ovarian cancer, tubo-ovarian abscess,
endometriomas or fibroids. In combination with the presence of ascites, a diagnosis of ovarian cancer is
highly likely. Early-stage ovarian cancer is difficult to diagnose due to the position of the ovary, but an
adenexal mass may be palpable in a slim woman. It should be noted that less than 20% of adenexal
masses in premenopausal women are found to be malignant; in postmenopausal women this increases to
around 50%. Chest examination is important to assess for pleural fluid and the neck and groin should be
examined for enlarged nodes.

Diagnosis and investigations
If ovarian cancer is suspected, a TVUSS is the initial imaging modality of choice to check for pelvic
pathology. A pelvic mass is characterized in terms of its size, consistency, the presence of solid elements,
bilaterality, the presence of ascites and extraovarian disease, including peritoneal thickening and omental
deposits. The investigation of any pelvic mass includes the measurement of tumour markers (Table 14.3).
CA125 is a non-specific tumour marker that is elevated in over 80% of epithelial ovarian cancers. It is
only raised in approximately 50% of early-stage epithelial ovarian cancers and is also commonly raised
in benign conditions such as pregnancy, endometriosis and alcoholic liver disease. The Risk of
Malignancy Index (RMI) is calculated from menopausal status, pelvic ultrasound features and CA125
level to triage pelvic masses into those at low, intermediate and high risk of malignancy.

Table 14.3 Tumour markers used in ovarian cancer diagnosis and follow-up

Pelvic pathology at intermediate or high risk of malignancy is further imaged using computed
tomography (CT) and/or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans. The CT scan is particularly useful for
assessment of extrapelvic disease and for staging. The MRI scan helps define tissue planes and
operability. Other investigations required for preoperative work-up include chest X-ray,
electrocardiography (ECG), full blood count, urea and electrolytes, and liver function tests.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

If the patient presents with gross ascites or pleural effusion, paracentesis or pleural aspiration may be
required for symptom relief and/or diagnosis. A sample of the fluid removed is sent for cytological
assessment. If the diagnosis is uncertain or if primary chemotherapy is being considered (for advanced
disease, or in patients not fit to undergo surgery), a biopsy is needed before treatment can be given. This
is performed laparoscopically or radiologically (ultrasound or CT-guided biopsy). Usually the omentum
is a good site for biopsy.

Staging
Ovarian cancer staging is based on clinicopathological assessment and, like other gynaecocolocial
cancers, uses the FIGO staging system (Table 14.4). Overall, 25% of patients present with stage 1
disease, 10% stage 2, 50% stage 3 and 15% stage 4 disease. Metastatic spread is by direct spread to
peritoneum and other organs and by lymphatic spread to pelvic and para-aortic nodes. A high percentage
of women with advanced disease have evidence of peritoneal disease on the diaphragmatic peritoneum
(Figure 14.1). Women with early ovarian cancer (stages 1 and 2) have up to 20% metastatic spread to
lymph nodes and this rises to 60% in advanced disease (stages 3 and 4).

Table 14.4 International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) staging of
ovarian cancer

www.medicalebookpdf.com

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 14.1 Advanced ovarian cancer illustrating diaphragmatic peritoneal disease.

Management
Surgery
Provided the patient is fit to undergo anaesthesia, surgery remains necessary for diagnosis, staging and
treatment of epithelial ovarian cancer. If the patient is at high risk of ovarian cancer, the surgery should
only be performed by a gynaecological oncologist, as this has been shown to improve outcomes. The
objective of surgery is to stage accurately the disease and remove all visible tumour. This is vitally
important in ovarian cancer as many studies indicate that the most important prognostic factor is no
residual disease following laparotomy.
A vertical incision is required to gain access to all areas of the abdomen. Ascites or peritoneal
washings are sampled and a total abdominal hysterectomy and BSO performed along with an
omentectomy. Further debulking may be required, possibly including resection of bowel, peritoneal
stripping or splenectomy in order to remove all tumour. Lymph node resection is important, particularly in
early-stage disease where studies have found occult metastatic disease in nodes in up to 25% of patients
with stage 1 tumours. Complete debulking to no visible disease varies from 40% to 80% of cases. Often
in advanced epithelial ovarian cancer, there is diffuse spread of disease throughout the abdominal cavity
making surgical clearance of tumour very difficult.
eResource 14.1
Surgery for epithelial ovarian cancer
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv14.1.php
If a patient has been operated on outside a cancer centre and is found to have an ovarian cancer,
restaging should be offered and this may be carried out laparoscopically. Occasionally, young patients
who are found to have an early-stage epithelial ovarian cancer wish to have conservative, fertilitysparing surgery. In these cases, unilateral salpingo–oophorectomy, omentectomy, peritoneal biopsies and
pelvic/para-aortic node dissection can be performed with endometrial sampling to exclude a synchronous
tumour. Fertility-sparing surgery may also be performed in patients with borderline tumours if fertility is
an issue, otherwise pelvic clearance should be performed. If a patient is unfit or unwilling to have
surgery, or if preoperative assessment indicates that complete debulking is unlikely to be achievable,
primary chemotherapy may be offered. If the patient responds to the chemotherapy, interval surgery can be
carried out after three cycles. Recent studies indicate that this strategy may reduce postoperative
morbidity but does not influence survival.
‘Second-look’ surgery is a planned laparotomy at the end of chemotherapy. The main function is to
assess and resect any residual disease. Data on second-look surgery indicate no survival benefit and
consequently it is not standard management outside clinical trials.
Following surgery, all patients with a diagnosis of epithelial ovarian cancer should be discussed at a
gynaecological oncology multidisciplinary team (MDT) meeting where their history, surgical management
and histology are reviewed by gynaecological oncologists, oncologists, radiologists, pathologists and
nursing staff. If the cancer has been properly staged as stage 1a or b, and is histologically low grade (well
or moderately differentiated), chemotherapy may be withheld. The role of chemotherapy in stage 1c
www.medicalebookpdf.com

disease is uncertain, but in practice most patients will be offered postoperative chemotherapy as with all
other stages of epithelial ovarian cancer.

Surgical management of ovarian cancer
• Surgery combined with platinum-based chemotherapy is the mainstay of treatment for advanced
ovarian cancer.
• The aim of surgery is complete or optimal cytoreduction (where <1 cm of residual macroscopic
disease is left behind).
• Tumour deposits on the bowel, spleen, peritoneal surfaces and diaphragm are usually amenable to
resection, while disease involving the porta hepatis and bowel mesentery are not.
• ‘Supraradical ovarian cancer surgery’ is appropriate in previously well, fit women with
disseminated disease if complete cytoreduction is achievable; it is associated with perioperative
morbidity and mortality and women must be carefully counselled.
• Three cycles of neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by interval debulking surgery is not inferior to
upfront surgery and has been shown to be associated with less morbidity.

Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy can be given as primary treatment, as an adjunct following surgery or for relapse of
disease. It can be used to prolong clinical remission and survival or for palliation. First-line treatment is
usually a combination of a platinum compound with paclitaxel. Most regimes are given on an outpatient
basis, 3 weeks apart for six cycles.
Platinum compounds are the most effective chemotherapeutic agents in ovarian cancer. They are heavy
metal agents that cause cross linkage of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) strands, thus arresting cell
replication. Carboplatin is now the main platinum compound used as it is less renal toxic and causes less
nausea than cisplatin, but is equally as effective. The dose of carboplatin is calculated according to the
glomerular filtration rate (GFR) using the area under the curve (AUC).
Paclitaxol is derived from the bark of the Pacific yew and works by causing microtubular damage to
the cell. This prevents replication and cell division. Pre-emptive steroids are given due to high-sensitivity
reactions; side-effects of peripheral neuropathy, neutropenia and myalgia are common and dose
dependent. Paclitaxol causes total loss of all body hair, irrespective of dose.
Bevacizumab, a monoclonal antibody against vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), inhibits
angiogenesis. It has been shown to be clinically effective at improving recurrence free and overall
survival when given in combination with carboplatin and paclitaxel in advanced ovarian cancer. The
side-effect profile of this drug includes hypertension, delayed wound healing, gastrointestinal perforation
and arterial thromboembolic events. This drug is not routinely prescribed as first-line treatment for
advanced ovarian cancer on the NHS due to cost issues; however, it is available for the treatment of
recurrent disease.
Following completion of chemotherapy, patients have a further CT scan to assess response to
treatment. This scan can be used for comparison in the future if there is clinical or biochemical evidence
of recurrence.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Follow-up of patients includes clinical examination and CA125 measurement. Studies have shown that
levels of CA125 start to rise prior to onset of clinical evidence of disease recurrence; however, treating
isolated rising CA125 levels does not improve survival. When disease recurs treatment is largely
palliative. If the duration of remission is more than 6 months, carboplatin may be used again; otherwise
taxol can be given or other chemotherapy agents, such as topotecan or liposomal doxyrubicin.

Prognosis
The survival figures depend on stage at presentation, volume of disease following surgery and the
histological grade of tumour. The overall 5-year survival from ovarian cancer is 46% in the UK (2010–
2011). The figures have improved due to the widespread introduction of centralized MDT care. Survival
is stage dependent: overall 5-year survival for stage 1 disease is over 90% compared to 30% for stage 3
disease. Prognostic factors in ovarian cancer survival are listed in Table 14.5; Table 14.6 shows the 5year survival rates by stage at diagnosis.

Primary peritoneal carcinoma
Primary peritoneal carcinoma (PPC) is a high-grade pelvic serous carcinoma. It is histologically
indistinct from tumours arising from the Fallopian tube or ovary. There are, however, morphological
differences between the two groups based on clinical findings at laparotomy. Criteria for diagnosis
includes:

Table 14.5 Prognostic factors in ovarian cancer
Stage of disease
Volume of residual disease post surgery
Histological type and grade of tumour
Age at presentation

Table 14.6 Ovarian cancer survival by stage at diagnosis
FIGO stage

5-year survival (%)

1

80–90%

2

65–70%

3

30–50%
www.medicalebookpdf.com

4

15%

• Normal sized or slightly bulky ovaries.
• More extraovarian disease than ovarian disease.
• Low volume peritoneal disease.
The clinical behaviour, prognosis and treatment is the same as for other high-grade pelvic serous
carcinomas, although there is a trend towards using primary chemotherapy as complete surgical debulking
is difficult.

Sex cord stromal tumours
These tumours account for approximately 10% per cent of ovarian tumours, but almost 90% cent of all
functional (i.e. hormone-producing) tumours. Generally, they are tumours of low malignant potential with
a good long-term prognosis. Some morbidity may arise from the oestrogen (granulosa, theca or Sertoli
cell) or androgen production (Seroli–Leydig or steroid cell) characteristic of these tumours, resulting in
precocious puberty, abnormal menstrual bleeding and an increased risk of endometrial cancer. The peak
incidence is around the age of the menopause, although juvenile granulosa cell tumour usually presents in
girls under 10 years of age, causing precocious puberty. Overall, granulosa cell tumours are the most
common subtype, accounting for over 70% of sex cord stromal tumours.

Clinical features
A significant percentage of these tumours present with manifestations of their hormone production,
typically irregular menstrual bleeding, postmenopausal bleeding or precocious puberty in young girls.
Granulosa cell tumours may present as a large pelvic mass or with pain due to torsion/haemorrhage.
Sertoli–Leydig cell tumours produce androgens in over 50% of cases. Patients present with a pelvic
mass and signs of virilization. Common symptoms are amenorrhoea, deep voice and hirsutism.
Occasionally, this group of tumours produce oestrogen and rarely renin, causing hypertension.
Most sex cord stromal tumours present as unilateral ovarian masses, measuring up to 15 cm in
diameter. Macroscopically, the tumour is often solid with areas of haemorrhage, and the cut surface may
be yellow due to high levels of steroid production.
Granulosa cell tumours produce inhibin, which can be used for follow-up surveillance; levels often
rise prior to clinical detection of recurrence.

Treatment
Treatment is based on the patient’s age and wish to preserve fertility. If the patient is young, unilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy, endometrial sampling and staging is sufficient. In the older group, full surgical
staging is recommended. Granulosa cell tumours can recur many years after initial presentation and longterm follow-up is required. Recurrence is usually well defined and surgery is the mainstay of treatment as
there is no effective chemotherapy regime.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Germ cell tumours
Malignant germ cell tumours occur mainly in young women and account for approximately 10% of
ovarian tumours. They are derived from primordial germ cells within the ovary and because of this may
contain any cell type. The emphasis of management is based mainly on fertility-preserving surgery and
chemotherapy.
The most common presenting symptom is a pelvic mass; 10% present acutely with torsion or
haemorrhage and due to the age incidence, some present during pregnancy. Seventy per cent of germ cell
tumours are stage 1; spread is by lymphatics or blood borne.
Dysgerminomas account for 50% of all germ cell tumours. They are bilateral in 20% of cases and
occasionally secrete human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG).
Endodermal sinus yolk sac tumours are the second most common germ cell tumours, accounting for
15% of the total. They are rarely bilateral and secrete α-fetoprotein (AFP). They present with a large
solid mass that often causes acute symptoms with torsion or rupture. Spread of endodermal sinus tumours
is a late event and is usually to the lungs.
Immature teratomas account for 15–20% of malignant germ cell tumours and about 1% of all
teratomas. They are classified as mature or immature depending on the grading of neural tissue present.
About one-third of teratomas secrete AFP. Occasionally, there can be malignant transformation of a cell
type within a mature teratoma. The most common cell type to transform is the epithelium, usually
squamous cell carcinoma.
Non-gestational choriocarcinomas are very rare, usually presenting in young girls with irregular
bleeding and very high levels of hCG.

Clinical features
Germ cell tumours should be suspected if a young woman presents with a large solid ovarian mass that is
rapidly growing. Tumour markers as detailed in Table 14.3 are measured preoperatively as this may
influence the need for postoperative chemotherapy. MRI is helpful to assess morphology, particularly
within teratomas. CT scaning of the abdomen allows assessment of the liver and lymph nodes. All
patients should have a chest X-ray to exclude pulmonary metastases.

Treatment
Surgery is tailored to suit the patient. As most women presenting with malignant germ cell tumours are of
reproductive age, fertility-sparing treatment may be preferred. An exploratory laparotomy is performed to
remove the tumour and assess contralateral spread to the other ovary (20% in dysgerminoma). If there is a
cyst present on the other ovary, this should be removed. Careful inspection of the abdominal cavity is
required with peritoneal biopsies and sampling of any enlarged pelvic or para-aortic nodes performed. If
metastatic disease is found, it should be debulked at surgery. Intraoperative frozen sections may be
required to assess nodal status.
Postoperative chemotherapy depends on stage of disease. Stage 1 dysgerminomas and low-grade
teratomas are treated by surgery alone and the 5-year survival is in excess of 90%. For the remainder of
tumours and for patients with disease outside the ovary, chemotherapy is given. The most common regime
used is a combination of bleomycin, etoposide and cisplatin (BEP), given as a course of three to four
www.medicalebookpdf.com

treatments, 3 weeks apart. This regime gives long-term cure rates of over 90% and also preserves fertility
if required.
If the patient has recurrent disease, 90% will usually present in the first year following diagnosis;
salvage chemotherapy has very good success rates.

KEY LEARNING POINTS
• Ovarian cancer tends to present late, with advanced disease because symptoms are non-specific.
• Screening has not proven effective using tumour markers or TVUSS.
• Treatment is based on removing all tumour surgically, combined with platinum-based
chemotherapy.
• Prognosis is stage dependent: stage 1 disease has a 80–90% 5-year survival, whereas stage 3
disease has a 30% 5-year survival.
• Sex cord stromal tumours usually present with endocrine effects due to excess secretion of
oestrogen or androgens.
• Germ cell tumours affect young women and are often cured by fertility-preserving surgery.

Further reading
Barakat RR, Bevers MW, Gershenson DM, Hoskins WJ (eds) (2002). Handbook of Gynecologic
Oncology, 2nd edn. London: Dunitz.
Chitrathara K, Rajaram S, Maheswari A (eds) (2009). Ovarian Cancer, Contemporary and Current
Management. Delhi: Jaypee.
Jacobs IJ, Menon U, Ryan A, et al. (2016). Ovarian cancer screening and mortality in the UK
Collaborative Trial of Ovarian Cancer Screening (UKCTOCS): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet
387(10022):945–56. Erratum Lancet 2016;387(10022):944.

Self assessment
CASE HISTORY
Mrs L is a 62-year-old woman who presents to the gynaecology clinic with non-specific abdominal
pain, a change in bowel habit and bloating. Her GP arranged a pelvic ultrasound scan, which found
bilateral complex solid/cystic pelvic masses, large volume ascites and omental caking.
A What is the most likely diagnosis?
B What are the key points in the examination and investigation?
Mrs L is found to have stage 3 high-grade serous ovarian cancer.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

C How would you manage her?
ANSWERS
A The symptoms associated with ovarian cancer are non-specific and doctors must maintain a high
index of suspicion when faced with persistent symptoms of bloating, irritable bowel and
abdominal pain. The scan report shows features suggestive of advanced ovarian cancer
(solid/cystic pelvic masses, ascites and extraovarian disease).
B Pelvic examination may reveal hard, fixed pelvic masses and free fluid in the abdomen (ascites) is
demonstrated by shifting dullness and/or a fluid thrill. Investigations include serum CA125 levels.
If the tumour secretes CA125, this can be used as a non-invasive test to monitor treatment response
and subsequently screen for recurrent disease. A CT scan is needed to stage the disease and plan
treatment. If there is a pleural effusion, this is generally tapped and a sample sent for cytological
assessment. Sometimes there is very large volume ascites and draining this can improve symptoms
in the short term as well as facilitating omental biopsy, which is more difficult when there is a lot
of fluid around.
C Treatment for most women with advanced ovarian cancer is determined following discussion at
the gynaecological oncology MDT meeting. If Mrs L is fit for surgery and preoperative
investigations suggest that complete tumour debulking is achievable, upfront surgery followed by
six cycles of adjuvant carboplatin and paclitaxel chemotherapy is generally preferred. Surgery
involves a midline laparotomy, total hysterectomy (removal of uterus and cervix) and BOS
(removal of both Fallopian tubes and ovaries), omentectomy, pelvic lymphadenectomy and
debulking of any extraovarian tumour deposits. Sometimes surgery is avoided in the primary
setting because the disease is not completely resectable, and in this scenario, three cycles of
neoadjuvant chemotherapy are given and a restaging CT scan performed to decide whether surgery
now is likely to remove all tumour deposits. If surgery takes place, the patient receives a further
three cycles of chemotherapy afterwards.

EMQ
A High-grade pelvic serous carcinoma.
B Mucinous BOT.
C Endometrioid ovarian cancer.
D Immature teratoma.
E Dysgerminoma.
F Granulosa cell tumour.
G Choriocarcinoma of the ovary.
H Sertoli–Leydig ovarian tumour.
I Dermoid cyst.
J Krukenberg tumour.
For each description below, choose the SINGLE most appropriate answer from the above list of
options. Each option may be used once,www.medicalebookpdf.com
more than once or not at all.

1 Associated with STIC lesions in the Fallopian tube.
2 Commonly associated with BRCA mutation carrier status.
3 May present with amenorrhoea, deep voice, hirsutism and acne.
4 May provoke precocious puberty in young girls.
5 Associated with endometriosis.
6 Secretes inhibin.
7 Associated with appendiceal tumours and pseudomyxoma peritoneii.
8 May contain hair, teeth, bone, cartilage and sebum.
9 Metastatic ovarian tumour from colorectal or breast primary.
ANSWERS
1A The term high-grade pelvic serous carcinoma has been coined to incorporate all high-grade
serous tumours arising from the ovary, Fallopian tube and/or peritoneum. There may be tubal
precursors, which are called serous tubal intraepithelial carcinoma (STIC) lesions, and they are
characterized by mutations in p53 in secretory cells of the distal Fallopian tube.
2A As many as 30% of high-grade pelvic serous cancers have BRCA mutations.
3H Sertoli—Leydig cell tumours produce androgens in over 50% of cases. Patients present with a
pelvic mass and signs of virilization.
4F Granulosa cell tumours frequently secrete oestrogen. Part of the work-up of girls presenting in
this way would be to exclude oestrogen-secreting tumours. Granulosa cell tumours may also
present as a large pelvic mass or with pain due to torsion/haemorrhage.
5C Endometriosis-associated ovarian cancers are usually of endometrioid or clear cell histological
subtype.
6F Granulosa cell tumours produce inhibin, which can be used for follow-up surveillance; levels
often rise prior to clinical detection of recurrence.
7B Mucinous BOTs may actually arise from the appendiceal carcinomas of low malignant potential
and can be associated with pseudomyxoma peritoneii.
8I Dermoids are classically associated with tissue such as hair and teeth, and a TVUSS can be
diagnostic. They are usually benign.
9J The ovary is also a common site for metastatic spread; Krukenberg tumours are ovarian
metastases associated with primary cancers of the colon, stomach and breast.

SBA QUESTIONS
1 A 34-year-old woman attends the gynaecology department because she has tested positive for a
BRCA1 mutation. She wishes to lower her risk of ovarian cancer as much as possible. She is
otherwise fit and well with no past medical history of note. Her cervical smears are up to date and
normal.
What surgery would you recommend? Choose the single best answer.
A Bilateral oophorectomy.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

B Bilateral salpingectomy with delayed oophorectomy.
C BSO.
D Subtotal hysterectomy and BSO.
E Total hysterectomy and BSO.
ANSWER
C Unless there are convincing reasons for hysterectomy as well, removing both Fallopian tubes and
ovaries is the best way to reduce the risk of ovarian cancer (90%) and premenopausal breast
cancer (50%). The downside is the surgical menopause that will ensue, but this can be effectively
managed with continuous combined hormone replacement therapy (HRT). There is little evidence
to suggest that this is harmful to cancer risk if there is no personal history of breast cancer (in
which case, all forms of HRT are avoided).
2 A 58-year-old woman presents with a large pelviabdominal mass extending to the level of the
xiphisternum. It has a heterogeneous appearance on scan with solid and cystic components. The
rest of the pelvis and abdomen appears normal and there is no free fluid. The CA125 level is 430
units. She is asymptomatic.
How would you manage this patient? Choose the single best answer.
A Laparoscopic ovarian cystectomy.
B Laparotomy, total abdominal hysterectomy, BSO, pelvic and para-aortic lymph node sampling,
omentectomy and debulking of tumour deposits.
C Repeat scan and CA125 in 3 months to check for interval change.
D Six cycles of neoadjuvant carboplatin and paclitaxel-based chemotherapy followed by restaging
CT scan at 3 months.
E Ultrasound-guided transcutaneous aspiration of ovarian cyst fluid and cytological assessment.
ANSWER
B This patient has a high risk of malignancy index (RMI) and therefore should undergo a full staging
laparotomy and complete debulking. If the ovarian mass is the only abnormal finding at
laparotomy, intraoperative frozen sections can be used to direct further surgical effort, since
pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy is not required if the cyst is benign. Aspiration of the cyst
is avoided when malignancy is suspected, to prevent ‘seeding’ malignant cells in the peritoneal
cavity.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

www.medicalebookpdf.com

CHAPTER 15

Malignant disease of the uterus
EMMA J CROSBIE

Introduction
Endometrial cancer
Sarcomas of the uterus
Further reading
Self assessment

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
• Describe the classification of uterine malignancy.
• Learn how malignant disease of the uterus presents.
• Describe which investigations are needed for women with suspected endometrial cancer.
• Know the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) staging of endometrial
cancer.
• Understand how endometrial cancer is managed.

Introduction
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Uterine cancer refers to tumours that arise from the uterine corpus (body of the uterus). By far the most
common are endometrial tumours that originate from the lining of the uterine cavity (endometrium).
Tumours arising from the myometrium (sarcomas) are rare.

Endometrial cancer
Incidence
Endometrial cancer is the most common gynaecological malignancy affecting UK women with an agerelated incidence of 95 per 100,000 women. The life-time risk of developing endometrial cancer is
approximately 1 in 46. The mean age of diagnosis is 62 years, although cancers can be diagnosed in
women throughout their reproductive life. Approximately 25% of endometrial cancers occur before the
menopause.
The incidence of endometrial cancer has risen steadily over the past 20 years as a consequence of the
ageing population, the trend away from hysterectomy for benign gynaecological disease and the obesity
epidemic.

Classification
Endometrial cancer usually arises from the glandular component of the endometrium and stromal tumours
are exceedingly rare. Endometrial cancers are classified as type 1 or type 2, depending on their
histological subtype (Figure 15.1) and are graded 1–3, with 3 being high grade (mostly abnormal cells).
Type 1 tumours are endometrioid adenocarcinomas that are oestrogen driven and arise from a background
of endometrial hyperplasia. Type 2 tumours include high-grade serous and clear cell histological subtypes
and arise from an atrophic endometrium.

Figure 15.1 Histological comparison of endometrial adenocarcinoma (A) with endometrial serous
carcinoma (B).

Aetiology
The risk factors for type 1 endometrial cancer are well established (Table 15.1). Most of these reflect an
increased life-time exposure to oestrogen. Oestrogen causes endometrial cells to proliferate when it is
unopposed by progesterone. Therefore, hyperoestrogenic states increase endometrial cancer risk, while
www.medicalebookpdf.com

cyclical or continuous progestin-containing hormone treatments reduce risk. Obese women are at risk of
endometrial cancer because they are more likely to have anovulatory menstrual cycles and less likely to
get pregnant. Furthermore, the aromatization of androgens to oestrogen by adipose tissue provides a
continuous postmenopausal supply of oestrogen. Besides oestrogen, insulin and insulin-like growth factor
stimulate endometrial proliferation, which is why endometrial cancer is more common in diabetic
women. Other risk factors include treatment with tamoxifen, a selective oestrogen receptor modulator
(SERM) used to prevent recurrent breast cancer, which is antioestrogenic in the breast but stimulatory in
the endometrium. New generation SERMs, such as raloxifene, have a lesser effect on the endometrium.
Hereditary predisposition to endometrial cancer is increasingly appreciated as genetic services and tests
are being developed. The most common association is with Lynch syndrome, an autosomal dominant
condition caused by mutations in one of the mismatch repair genes MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 or, less
commonly, PMS2. The life-time risk of endometrial cancer in women with Lynch syndrome is 40–60%.
Other tumour associations include colorectal, ovarian and urothelial tumours, depending on the mutation
responsible. The risk factors for type 2 endometrial cancer are less well understood.

Table 15.1 Risk and protective factors for type 1 endometrial cancer

Prevention
Hormonal contraceptives and intrauterine devices reduce the risk of endometrial cancer (Table 15.1).
Women with Lynch syndrome are offered prophylactic hysterectomy following completion of
childbearing.

Screening
www.medicalebookpdf.com

There is currently no evidence to support screening for endometrial cancer in high-risk groups or the
general population.

Clinical features
Endometrial cancer usually presents at an early stage following the onset of postmenopausal bleeding
(PMB) (see also Chapter 4, Disorders of menstrual bleeding). Approximately 5–10% of women with
PMB have an underlying gynaecological malignancy and this ‘red flag’ symptom should always be
investigated. Abnormal bleeding is the most common presenting complaint in premenopausal women too,
who variously complain of heavy, irregular or intermenstrual bleeding (IMB). Women at more advanced
stages of disease present with abdominal pain, urinary dysfunction, bowel disturbances or respiratory
symptoms.
Sometimes endometrial cancer is picked up incidentally on a cervical smear, which shows ‘abnormal
glandular cytology’. Signs of endometrial cancer include bleeding from the cervical os on speculum
examination and a bulky uterus on bimanual pelvic examination. In most women with endometrial cancer,
however, pelvic examination is completely normal.

Postmenopausal bleeding
• PMB is a ‘red flag’ symptom for gynaeco-logical cancer and should always be taken seriously.
• Careful inspection of the external genitalia followed by speculum examination will exclude vulval,
vaginal and cervical cancer as the underlying cause.
• Physical examination may be normal in women with endometrial cancer, which can only be excluded
by transvaginal ultrasound scan (TVUSS), hysteroscopy and/or endometrial biopsy.
• Benign causes of PMB include unscheduled bleeding on hormone replacement therapy (HRT) and
vaginal atrophy.

Diagnosis and investigation of PMB
Many hospitals have a one-stop clinic dedicated to the urgent investigation of women with PMB. The
mainstays of diagnosis are TVUSS, hysteroscopy and endometrial biopsy.
TVUSS allows a quick and accurate assessment of endometrial thickness (Figure 15.2). If the
endometrium measures less than 4 mm, cancer is very unlikely and further investigation is not needed.
Any measurement greater than this requires further evaluation by hysteroscopy and/or biopsy.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 15.2 Transvaginal ultrasound scan of the uterus showing thickened endometrium.

Figure 15.3 Hysteroscopic picture of endometrial carcinoma.
Hysteroscopy is performed in the outpatient setting under local anaesthetic where possible. A general
anaesthetic is required in patients with cervical stenosis or where hysteroscopy is poorly tolerated. A thin
camera is passed into the uterine cavity, allowing visualization of the endometrium and directed biopsy of
any abnormal areas (Figure 15.3). In addition, an endometrial sampler is used for histological assessment
of the endometrium as described in Chapter 2, Gynaecological history, examination and investigations.
The histology report describes the type (endometrioid or other histological subtype) and grade of
tumour. Complex hyperplasia with atypia is a premalignant condition that frequently coexists with lowgrade endometrioid tumours of the endometrium. The risk of progression to endometrial cancer is 25–
50%.

Staging
The extent of disease (stage) is determined by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan (Figure 15.4) and
FIGO staging uses this information (Table 15.2). Patients with high-grade tumours undergo a computed
tomography (CT) scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis to exclude distant metastases. In the UK, women
with early stage (stage IA or IB) endometrioid tumours are offered surgery at their local hospital. Women
www.medicalebookpdf.com

with high-grade or high-stage (stage II or above) tumours undergo surgery in a cancer centre, as this has
been shown to improve outcomes.

Figure 15.4 Magnetic resonance imaging of stage 1B endometrial carcinoma.

Table 15.2 International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) staging of
carcinoma of the uterus

Pathological terminology in endometrial cancer
Type
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• Endometrial tumours are classified histologically as type 1 endometrioid adenocarcinomas
(comprising 75–80% of all tumours) or type 2, including high-grade serous and clear cell tumours.
• Type 2 are more aggressive and carry a worse prognosis.
Grade
• Histological analysis differentiates between low-grade and high-grade (grade 3) tumours, of which
the higher grade is more aggressive.
Stage
• FIGO staging describes the size and spread of the tumour and is used with the above to give
prognostic information to patients.

Management
Surgery
Surgery is the mainstay of treatment for endometrial cancer. The extent of surgery depends on several
factors including grade and stage of disease, and the patient’s comorbidities.
Standard surgery is total hysterectomy and removal of both Fallopian tubes and ovaries (bilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy, BSO). This can be performed abdominally or laparoscopically (total, vaginally
assisted or robotically). If the MRI suggests cervical involvement, a modified radical hysterectomy is
performed, which also removes a cuff of vagina, paracervical and parametrial tissue to ensure adequate
excision margins (Figure 15.5). If the tumour is high grade (grade 3) or of type 2 histology, many centres
perform pelvic and para-aortic node dissection because nodal disease (to either pelvis or para-aortic
lymph node chains) is seen in one-third of patients. The role of nodal dissection remains contentious; a
large scale UK study (ASTEC) failed to show a survival benefit in endometrial cancer patients who had
pelvic node dissection. Critics of the study argue that it was underpowered to show survival benefit in
those at highest risk of nodal disease.
eResource 15.1
Surgical treatment of endometrial cancer
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv15.1.php

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 15.5 Radical hysterectomy showing cervical invasion of endometrial cancer.

Adjuvant treatment
Postoperative radiotherapy reduces local recurrence rate but does not improve survival. Different units
treat following surgery or only treat if the cancer recurs. Strategies include local radiotherapy to the
vaginal vault over a short period of time (brachytherapy) for local disease, or brachytherapy combined
with external beam radiotherapy for locally advanced disease (stage III). Chemotherapy is given for
advanced or metastatic disease, although there is currently little evidence to support its use.

Hormone treatment
Some women are not fit for surgery and others wish to avoid it for fertility-sparing reasons. Treatment
with high-dose oral or intrauterine progestins is successful for some women with complex atypical
hyperplasia and low-grade stage IA endometrial tumours, but relapse rates are high.

Endometrial cancer and fertility
• Primary infertility due to polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a risk factor for premenopausal
endometrial cancer.
• Women diagnosed with endometrial cancer during investigation for primary infertility face two
devastating diagnoses at once.
• Alternatives to hysterectomy for premenopausal women are only possible for precancer or earlystage low-grade endometrial cancers.
• Hormone therapy (oral progestagens or LNG-IUS) is associated with moderate response and high
relapse rates.
• Women faced with losing their fertility should be referred to a specialist to discuss ovarian
conservation and/or stimulation for egg retrieval and surrogacy.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Prognosis
The overall 5-year survival rate for endometrial cancer is 80%, although this varies depending on tumour
type, stage and grade of tumour (Table 15.3). In stage I disease, overall 5-year survival ranges from 93%
for patients with low-grade IA disease to 66% in patients with high-grade IB disease.
Adverse prognostic features include advanced age, grade 3 tumours, type 2 histology, deep myometrial
invasion, lymphovascular space invasion, nodal involvement and distant metastases.

Table 15.3 Five-year survival for women with endometrial cancer
Stage

5-year survival (%)

I

88

II

75

III

55

IV

16

Sarcomas of the uterus
These are rare tumours accounting for approximately 5% of all uterine cancers. They are classified into
pure sarcomas, mixed epithelial sarcomas and heterologous sarcomas. The most common types are
leiomyosarcomas and carcinosarcomas.

Pure sarcomas
This group includes endometrial stromal sarcomas and leiomyosarcoma. Endometrial stromal sarcomas
occur in perimenopausal women presenting with irregular bleeding and a soft, enlarged uterus. The
majority are low grade and surgery is the main treatment.
Leiomyosarcomas are rare tumours of the myometrium. Rarely (0.75%), they are associated with
malignant transformation of benign fibroids and present with a rapidly growing pelvic mass and pain.
Preoperative diagnosis is difficult, but may be aided by MRI, which can delineate areas of necrosis
within the fibroid, suggestive of malignant change. The uterus is enlarged and soft on palpation. Surgery is
the main treatment and adjuvant treatment may be considered if the mitotic count is high (above 10
mitoses per high powered field). Metastatic spread is usually vascular to distant sites, such as lung and
brain.

Mixed epithelial sarcomas (carcinosarcoma)
www.medicalebookpdf.com

This group of tumours, formerly known as malignant mixed Müllerian tumours, contain both
carcinomatous and sarcomatous elements. The carcinomatous component is usually glandular and the
sarcomatous component is homologous (endometrial, stromal and/or smooth muscle) or heterologous
(tissues not normally found in the uterus, including bone, cartilage and skeletal muscle). The majority
present after the menopause and sometimes there is a history of previous pelvic irradiation. There is
usually a history of PMB and a fleshy mass is often seen protruding from the cervix along with an
enlarged soft uterus. Treatment is surgery followed by postoperative radiotherapy. The 5-year survival is
73% if confined to the uterus, but only 25% if the tumour has spread outside the uterus.

Heterologous sarcomas
This rare group of tumours consists of sarcomatous tissue not usually found in the uterus, such as striated
muscle, bone or cartilage. The most common is rhabdomyosarcoma, which may present in children as a
grape-like mass protruding from the cervix with a watery discharge. Histology reveals primitive
rhabdomyoblasts. Recurrence rates are high with distant metastases.

KEY LEARNING POINTS
• Endometrial cancer is the most common gynaeco-logical malignancy.
• The majority of cancers present with stage I disease and the overall 5-year survival is 80%.
• Type 2 and high-grade tumours have the worst prognosis.
• Obesity and other hyperoestrogenic states play a major aetiological role.
• The majority of patients present with PMB; however, 25% of cases occur in premenopausal
women.
• 5–10% of women with PMB will have an underlying gynaecological malignancy.
• Endometrial biopsy ± hysteroscopy is the gold standard for diagnosis, while MRI defines the extent
of disease.
• Total hysterectomy and BSO is the treatment of choice for most patients.

Further reading
MacKintosh ML, Crosbie EJ (2013). Obesity-driven endometrial cancer: is weight loss the answer?
BJOG 120:791–4.
Morice P, Leary A, Creutzberg C, Abu-Rustum N, Darai E (2015). Endometrial cancer. Lancet
387:1094–108.

Self assessment
CASE HISTORY
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Mrs P is a 65-year-old woman who presents to the gynaecology clinic with PMB. She is obese and
suffers from type 2 diabetes. She has no children, has never taken HRT and does not smoke. Her
cervical smears have always been normal.
A What is the most likely diagnosis?
B What are the key points in the examination and investigation?
Mrs P is found to have a grade 1 stage 1A endometrioid adenocarcinoma.
C How would you manage her?
ANSWERS
A PMB is a red flag symptom for gynaecological cancer. Cancers of the endometrium, cervix, vagina
and vulva all present with abnormal bleeding. Mrs P’s medical history and risk factor profile
make endometrial cancer the most likely diagnosis.
B Mrs P has several risk factors for endometrial cancer, including obesity, type 2 diabetes and
nulliparity. A normal, up-to-date cervical smear history makes cancer of the cervix extremely
unlikely. Cancers of the vulva, vagina and cervix should be excluded by careful inspection. Blood
coming from the cervical os indicates uterine bleeding. Bimanual pelvic examination may find a
bulky uterus or pelvic mass, although a normal examination does not exclude endometrial cancer.
C Treatment for most women with endometrial cancer involves total hysterectomy (removal of uterus
and cervix) and BSO (removal of both Fallopian tubes and ovaries). It is important to assess
fitness for anaesthetic as many women with endometrial cancer have comorbidities, including
obesity, type 2 diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, sleep apnoea and poor mobility,
that limit their ability to tolerate general anaesthesia. Laparoscopic surgery is now standard of
care for women with endometrial cancer but this may be difficult to achieve in women with
morbid obesity who cannot tolerate the prolonged head-down tilt required or where previous
abdominal surgery has resulted in adhesions and scarring. All women with endometrial cancer
should be discussed at the central gynaecological oncology multidisciplinary team (MDT)
meeting. Women with low-grade early-stage disease may undergo surgery in their local hospital
while high-risk cases are referred centrally for care. All women are offered support from
gynaecological oncology clinical nurse specialists or Macmillan nurses, who provide a single
point of contact for continuity of care as well as written information, contact phone numbers and
emotional support.

EMQ
A Simple hyperplasia of the endometrium.
B Complex hyperplasia of the endometrium with atypia.
C Endometrioid adenocarcinoma of the endometrium.
D Serous uterine carcinoma.
E Clear cell carcinoma of the uterus.
F Carcinosarcoma of the uterus.
G Leiomyosarcoma of the uterus.
H Endometrial stromal sarcoma.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

I Rhabdomyosarcoma.
For each description below, choose the SINGLE most appropriate answer from the above list of
options. Each option may be used once, more than once or not at all.
1 Most common uterine malignancy.
2 Rare tumour of myometrium.
3 Rare uterine tumour derived from skeletal muscle.
4 Precursor lesion of endometrioid adenocarcinoma of the endometrium.
ANSWERS
1C 75–80% of endometrial tumours are type 1, which are endometrioid adenocarcinomas. The rest
are type 2, including high-grade serous and clear cell histological subtype.
2G Leiomyosarcomas are rare tumours of the myometrium. Carcinosarcomas contain both
carcinomatous and sarcomatous elements.
3I This rare tumour may be diagnosed in children; it is a heterologous sarcoma as it contains
sarcomatous tissue not usually located in the uterus.
4B The type 1 endometroid adenocarcinomas are hormone dependent and develop from hyperplasia
of the endometrium. In contrast, type 2 tumours may develop from an atrophic endometrium.

SBA QUESTIONS
1 A 54-year-old woman attends the gynaecology department with PMB. A TVUSS measures her
endometrial thickness as 8 mm. An endometrial biopsy shows moderately differentiated
adenocarcinoma cells.
What is the most appropriate staging investigation? Choose the single best answer.
A Chest X-ray.
B CT scan of her thorax, abdomen and pelvis.
C Hysteroscopy.
D MRI scan of her pelvis.
E Transabdominal ultrasound scan.
ANSWER
D MRI is used to determine the extent of the tumour for staging. It is possible to tell how far through
the myometrium the tumour has spread, so surgery can then be planned. No other imaging modality
will give this information accurately. An ultrasound scan is too subjective and a CT scan does not
have ideal enhancement of tissue types.
2 A fit 72-year-old woman has an MRI after an endometrial biopsy shows endometrioid
adenocarcinoma of the endometrium. Staging from the MRI is stage II. What management is
www.medicalebookpdf.com

indicated? Choose the single best answer.
A Carboplatin-based chemotherapy.
B Total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophrectomy.
C External beam radiation therapy to the pelvis.
D Modified radical hysterectomy.
E Brachytherapy.
ANSWER
D If the MRI suggests cervical involvement, a modified radical hysterectomy is performed, which
also removes a cuff of vagina, paracervical and parametrial tissue to ensure adequate excision
margins. Simple hysterectomy would have a high relapse rate. Chemotherapy or brachytherapy is
not indicated. However, in very elderly unfit for surgery women, these options could be explored.
External beam radiotherapy would also not be a first-line treatment and there is no evidence that it
would prevent progression of the tumour.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

www.medicalebookpdf.com

CHAPTER 16

Premalignant and malignant disease of the
lower genital tract
EMMA J CROSBIE

Introduction
Premalignant disease of the cervix
Malignant disease of the cervix
Malignant disease of the vagina
Malignant disease of the vulva
Further reading
Self assessment

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
• Understand the pathogenesis of lower genital tract malignancy.
• Understand primary prevention of cervical cancer through human papillomavirus (HPV)
vaccination and cervical screening.
• Understand the diagnosis, International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) staging
and management of premalignant and malignant disease of the lower genital tract, including cervix,
vagina and vulva.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Introduction
Cancer of the cervix in higher income countries is relatively uncommon due to screening. Cancers of the
vagina and vulva are far less common than cervical cancer in both higher and lower income countries.
This chapter covers premalignant and malignant disease of the lower genital tract.

Premalignant disease of the cervix
Introduction
Cervical screening has been shown to reduce both the incidence and the number of deaths from cervical
cancer in higher income countries. It has been estimated that cervical screening prevents around 5,000
deaths every year in the UK alone.

Epidemiology and aetiology
Cervical cancer is caused by persistent high-risk HPV infection. HPV is a small, double-stranded
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) virus of which there are more than 100 different types. These are classified
as low-risk or high-risk types, depending on their ability to cause cancer. Low-risk types HPV 6 and 11
cause benign warts, while high-risk types HPV 16, 18, 31, 33 and 45 cause cervical cancer. HPV
infection is spread during sexual intercourse. Infection is very common following the onset of sexual
activity and up to 80% of adults show serological evidence of previous infection. Infection is usually
transient and of no clinical consequence, but a minority of individuals develop a persistent genital
infection that predisposes them to premalignant and malignant change (see below under Natural history of
CIN). Smoking reduces the efficiency with which the virus is cleared by the immune system and increases
the risk of persistent infection. Women who are immunocompromised, for example those with human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and transplant recipients on long-term immunosuppressive therapy, are
particularly at risk of premalignant and malignant disease of the cervix.

Pathophysiology
The tubular cervix is composed of stromal tissue covered by by squamous epithelium in the vagina
(ectocervix) and columnar epithelium within the cervical canal (endocervix). The endocervix contains
many deep folds, called crypts, that are lined by columnar epithelium. The meeting of the two types of
epithelium is called the squamocolumnar junction (SCJ) and this is usually on the ectocervix (Figure
16.1). The position of the SCJ varies throughout life. In children it lies at the external cervical os, at
puberty it extends outwards onto the ectocervix as the cervix enlarges, and in adult life it returns to the
external cervical os through the process of metaplasia, which is the physiological transformation of
columnar epithelium to squamous epithelium. The so-called ‘transformation zone’ (TZ) is defined as the
area between the original SCJ and the current SCJ where the epithelium changes from columnar to
squamous epithelium over time. Sometimes the columnar epithelium is covered by squamous epithelium,
leading to retention of mucus – this is called a nabothian follicle (Figure 16.2). The TZ is the site where
premalignancy and malignancy develop.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 16.1 Normal cervix with transformation zone.

Figure 16.2 Normal cervix with nabothian follicle.
When HPV infection persists in certain individuals, it triggers an oncogenic process in the region of
the TZ where metaplasia occurs. Integration of HPV DNA into the basal epithelial cells leads to
immortalization and rapid cellular turnover. This disordered immaturity within the epithelium is called
‘cervical intraepithelial neoplasia’ (CIN) and is truly an intraepithelial condition (cancer is diagnosed
when this process breaks the basement membrane). Immature cells are hyperchromatic with large nuclei,
minimal cytoplasm and abnormal mitotic figures. CIN is classified as either low-grade (CIN 1) or highgrade disease (CIN 2 and 3), depending on whether the abnormal cells are seen in the bottom third or top
two-thirds of the cervical epithelium, respectively.

Natural history of CIN
Regression and progression of CIN may occur. Spontaneous regression of low-grade disease is not
uncommon and is likely to occur through the patient’s own cell-mediated immunity. This is the argument
for observational follow-up in patients with low-grade abnormality. High-grade disease is less likely to
regress spontaneously and requires treatment, as there is a risk of progression to cancer. If left untreated,
around 20% of patients with high-grade abnormalities develop cancer of the cervix. Reasons for this
www.medicalebookpdf.com

remain unclear but may include high-risk HPV types, reduced host immunity and smoking. There is a
convincing link between CIN and cancer of the cervix, as nearly all microscopic cancers of the cervix
coexist with CIN.

Diagnosis and investigations
Cervical cytology
Cells exfoliated from the cervix can be examined under the microscope and this acts as a good screening
test. Originally the ‘Pap smear’ was introduced by Papanicolou, where cells were removed from the
cervix using a wooden spatula and placed on a glass slide and fixed. The Pap smear has now been
superseded by liquid-based cytology (LBC), whereby a small brush is used to sample cells from the TZ
and the brush head placed in fixative. This is then spun down and the cellular aspect of the specimen
examined under the microscope. For more than 95% of women, cervical cytology is normal and normal
squamous cells are seen (Figure 16.3). Abnormal cervical cytology shows squamous cells at different
stages of maturity (dyskaryosis). Like CIN, cervical cytology is classified as low grade (minor
cytological abnormalities showing mild dyskaryosis or borderline change) or high grade (moderate and
severe dyskaryosis) (Figure 16.4). There is some correlation between the grade of cytological
abnormality and the extent of CIN found on the cervix, but this is not totally reliable. Cervical cytology
triages patients to the colposcopy clinic for further assessment (see below under Colposcopy). The
sensitivity of a single cervical smear for high-grade CIN detection is between 40% and 70%; however, as
there is slow progression for most women with CIN to cancer, if a lesion is missed then this should be
picked up on a subsequent test. Women who attend regularly for cervical cytology have a very low risk of
developing cervical cancer.

Figure 16.3 Liquid-based cytology – normal cytology.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 16.4 Liquid-based cytology – severe dyskaryosis.

The role of HPV testing in cervical screening
High-risk HPV testing improves the sensitivity of cervical screening. Its value lies in its extremely high
negative predictive power, which means that if a woman tests high-risk HPV negative, her risk of
developing cervical cancer over the next 5–10 years is exceptionally low. The majority of women
(around 95%) have normal cervical cytology and are placed on routine recall. Women with high-grade
cytology (2%) are referred urgently for colposcopic assessment. Women with minor cytological
abnormalities undergo reflex testing with high-risk HPV. HPV-negative women are returned to routine
recall, while high-risk HPV-positive women are referred for colposcopy. Many countries, including the
UK, are now moving towards primary HPV screening; that is, testing all cervical cytology specimens for
high-risk HPV first, and carrying out reflex cytological assessment on those that test positive. This will
reduce the costs of the screening programme, since HPV testing is automated and achieves a high
throughput, while cytological assessment is manual and requires a skilled workforce.

The National Cervical Screening Programme
Since 1988, the UK has offered population-based cervical screening. Women aged 25–64 are invited
every 3–5 years to take part in the screening programme. Invitations for cervical screening and the
handling of results are coordinated by the National Health Service Cervical Screening Programme
(NHSCCP). The coverage in the UK is around 70–85% of the population. There has been a recent trend
for a fall in uptake of cervical screening in the 25–34 age group, which is worrying. Reasons for this
remain unclear, but may include ignorance and a lack of education about the importance of screening.

Global view
The main burden of cervical cancer is in low income countries, where it is a common killer of women
during their reproductive years. This ‘hidden’ cancer can take away young mothers who are head of
their family unit, causing considerable emotional and economic upset. In higher income countries,
cervical cancer is an uncommon malignancy due to screening, education and access to good medical
care.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Colposcopy
Colposcopy is the examination of the magnified cervix using a light source (Figure 16.5). It is used for
both diagnosis and treatment. The woman undresses and places her legs in the semi-lithotomy position. A
speculum is placed in the vagina and the cervix examined with a light source, under magnification (5–20fold). The application of acetic acid and iodine solutions highlights abnormal areas of the cervix that can
be biopsied. Acetic acid causes nucleoproteins within cells to coagulate temporarily; therefore, areas of
increased cell turnover, including CIN, appear white (Figure 16.6). Areas of CIN lack intracytoplasmic
glycogen and fail to stain brown when iodine is applied. CIN is a preneoplastic process and the process
of angiogenesis (new blood vessel formation) is apparent in CIN when viewed through the colposcope
(Figure 16.7). If CIN is present, the colposcopist determines whether the appearances are low or high
grade. The latter can be treated in the clinic on the same visit (known as ‘see and treat’); the former can
be monitored with a subsequent colposcopy and cytology 6 months later. A biopsy usually helps make the
decision if unsure (‘select and treat’). All doctors and nurses carrying out colposcopy are required to
undergo a period of training and examination to ensure high quality and standards of care are met. In
addition, each colposcopy service undergoes a rigorous external quality assurance assessment every 5
years to ensure high standards.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 16.5 Colposcope.

Figure 16.6 Cervix with acetic acid.

Figure 16.7 Cervix with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia and new vessels.

Treatment of premalignant disease of the cervix
The aims of treatment are to effectively eradicate CIN, ensuring that post-treatment cytology is negative,
while minimizing harm to the patient from the treatment. High-grade CIN requires treatment, usually with
excision or ablation. Low-grade CIN regresses spontaneously in up to 60% of cases; therefore, close
follow-up with colposcopy and cytology 6 months after initial diagnosis is favoured as this avoids
overtreating lesions that might have regressed. In the UK, the favoured method of treatment for highergrade CIN is loop diathermy (large loop excision of transformation zone, LLETZ). Under local
anaesthetic, a diathermy wire loop is used to remove a portion of the cervix that includes the TZ with the
area of CIN (Figure 16.8). CIN can develop within the crypts of the epithelium and therefore excisional
techniques need to be at least 7 mm deep. The procedure takes 15 minutes under local anaesthetic. The
advantages of this excisional technique are that it is clinically effective (95% of patients have negative
cytology at 6 months), cost-efficient (patients can be treated at the first hospital visit) and it provides a
specimen for pathological assessment (1% of loop biopsies have an unsuspected microscopic cancer).
The disadvantage relates to its potential impact on obstetric outcome. Small excisional treatments are
unlikely to have obstetric consequences; however, if a large excision or repeat excisions remove a
www.medicalebookpdf.com

substantial proportion of the cervix, there is an increased risk of midtrimester miscarriage and preterm
delivery in subsequent pregnancies. This concern relates to young women who have not completed their
family. Recognizing the potential for overtreatment has been the main reason why women under 25 are not
screened, as many lesions in this group of women are associated with HPV infection and simply regress
with observational follow-up.

Figure 16.8 Large loop excision of transformation zone.
Other options have been suggested for the treatment of CIN including cold coagulation and cone
biopsy. The term ‘cold coagulation’ is a misnomer as the treatment involves placing a hot probe on the
cervix in outpatients under local anaesthetic. It is a destructive treatment, is effective for both high- and
low-grade CIN but does not provide a specimen. Cone biopsy involves cutting away a portion of the
cervix under general anaesthetic and produces a specimen, like a LLETZ. Its disadvantage relates to the
need for a general anaesthetic and 5% of patients may develop cervical stenosis or incompetence, which
has obstetric implications. It has been largely superseded by loop diathermy.
Patients who have received treatment for CIN undergo a ‘test of cure’ 6 months later. This includes a
high-risk HPV test and cytological assessment. If negative, the woman is returned to routine recall; that is,
cervical screening in 3 years time. If positive, repeat colposcopy is indicated to identify any residual,
untreated CIN. A woman with a history of CIN has an increased life-time risk of recurrent CIN and
cervical cancer.

HPV vaccination
HPV vaccines have been shown to be safe and effective at preventing persistent high-risk HPV infection
CIN. School-based immunization in the UK is aimed at 12–13-year-old girls so it will take many years to
www.medicalebookpdf.com

know if HPV vaccination can reduce deaths from cervical cancer. The bivalent vaccine prevents
persistent infection with HPV types 16 and 18, which together are responsible for more than 70% of cases
of cervical cancer. In 2011, the bivalent vaccine was replaced by the quadrivalent vaccine, which
additionally protects against HPV types 6 and 11, the main perpetrators of genital warts. Uptake of the
vaccine has been good (75–85%) and it is expected that this will result in fewer women being referred
for colposcopy when they reach screening age. Current vaccination strategies are unlikely to result in the
eradication of cervical cancer because other high-risk HPV types are not included and uptake is not
universal. Future strategies will increase efficacy by vaccinating adolescent boys and the development of
new polyvalent vaccines that provide protection against more high-risk HPV types.

KEY LEARNING POINTS
• Cervical cancer is now considered a preventable disease in countries where resources permit.
• Prophylactic HPV vaccination can prevent infection with high-risk HPV types that cause cancers of
the cervix and other lower genital tract sites.
• Regular screening by cervical cytology allows premalignant disease to be detected and treated
before it undergoes malignant transformation.
• Women who are treated for high-grade CIN are at increased risk of cervical cancer in their lifetime
compared to other women, but regular cervical screening will pick up residual or recurrent disease
that can be treated.

Malignant disease of the cervix
Clinical presentation
The clinical presentation is variable. Many patients with small volume microscopic disease are
asymptomatic and are picked up incidentally following a loop biopsy of the cervix for preinvasive
disease. Most cervical cancers, however, are friable, vascular masses on the cervix and patients present
with abnormal bleeding, typically postcoital (PCB), prolonged, intermenstrual (IMB) or postmenopausal
(PMB) bleeding (Figure 16.9). Any woman with these symptoms should therefore undergo a pelvic
examination, including visualization of the cervix. In advanced disease (stages III–IV), patients may
experience a number of distressing symptoms including pain (malignant infiltration of the spinal cord),
incontinence (due to vesicovaginal fistulae), anaemia (from chronic vaginal bleeding) and renal failure
(from ureteric blockage).

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 16.9 Cervical cancer.
A pelvic and speculum examination usually clinches the diagnosis as there is often a cervical mass that
bleeds on contact and if advanced disease, a hardness and fixity of the tissues. A biopsy should be taken
in the outpatient setting. Very occasionally, the diagnosis can be missed as some tumours are endophytic
rather than exophytic and therefore less clinically revealing. The clinician therefore needs to retain a
level of clinical suspicion in the presence of unexplained symptoms and investigate patients with
persistent problems.

Pathophysiology
The majority (70%) of cervical cancers are squamous cell carcinomas, with adenocarcinomas making up
most of the remainder. In higher income countries with screening programmes, there has been a relative
fall in the numbers of squamous tumours and a relative rise in the incidence of adenocarcinomas. In the
UK, 30% of tumours are adenocarcinomas and are less likely to be picked up on cervical screening.
Precursors of adenocarcinoma, known as cervical glandular intraepithelial neoplasia (CGIN), can also be
detected at colposcopy, although lesions reside within the endocervical canal and may be difficult to
visualize. Often CGIN is found incidentally in loop excision biopsies carried out for high-grade CIN; it is
not uncommon for the two precursors to coexist. Cervical tumours are locally infiltrative in the pelvic
area, but also spread via lymphatics and, in the late stages, via blood vessels. The tumour can grow
through the cervix to reach the parametria (anatomical area lateral to the cervix), bladder, vagina and
rectum. Metastases can occur, therefore, in pelvic (iliac and obturator) and para-aortic nodes and, in the
later stages, liver and lungs.

Investigation and the importance of staging
Assessing the stage of the disease is crucial for planning treatment. The stage of disease also correlates
with prognosis. Staging for cervical cancer is given in Table 16.1. Patients are staged according to the
FIGO system. A biopsy is crucial to confirm malignancy and assess the tumour type. Magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) of the abdomen and pelvis will assess the local spread of the disease in the cervix and
will detect enlarged lymph nodes in the pelvic area. A chest X-ray is vital to exclude lung metastases. An
examination under anaesthetic may be helpful when, despite the above tests, the clinician is still unclear
whether the tumour is operable. Doing a rectovaginal examination under anaesthetic can give crucial
information on the tumour including size of disease, fixity and vaginal involvement, and a cystoscopy can
www.medicalebookpdf.com

help eliminate bladder involvement. Small mobile tumours favour a surgical approach, whereas larger
fixed tumours favour the use of radiotherapy. The FIGO staging includes an intravenous urogram to ensure
the integrity of the ureters; however, this is not standard practice in higher income countries, where MRI
has superseded such tests. The staging of the disease is based on clinical findings, unlike other
gynaecological tumours where there is a reliance on surgery and pathology to give the ultimate stage. The
reasons for this are that radiotherapy is used in advanced disease and it still remains possible to stage
patients in low income countries where most of the disease occurs.

Treatment
Treatment for cervical cancer depends on the stage of the disease, the requirement for future fertility and
the patient’s performance status. Ideally, all cancer patients should be discussed within the context of a
multidisciplinary team (MDT) of doctors (surgeons, radiotherapists, radiologists and pathologists) and
nurses, so that the most appropriate treatment can be offered to the patient. The fitness of the patient is
crucial before embarking on treatment as radical surgery may not be appropriate in an unfit patient.

Preclinical lesions: stage IA
These microscopic tumours have a low volume of cancer and are usually picked up as incidental findings
after loop excision for precancerous disease. Small lesions must be removed with a clear margin of
excision, and the preinvasive disease (CIN) that invariably coexists should also be completely excised as
the cancer is often multifocal. If the preinvasive disease is not completely excised then a repeat loop
biopsy or knife cone biopsy must be carried out. For microscopic lesions (stage IA1), local excision with
good clear margins is all that is required. This allows fertility to be preserved and a hysterectomy is not
necessary.

Table 16.1 Staging and prognosis of cervical cancer

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Clinical invasive cervical carcinoma: stages IB–IV
The tumour volumes are much greater in patients with stage 1B disease and therefore fertility-preserving
treatment for this group of patients is more challenging. When small volume disease is confined to the
cervix (stage IB1), radical hysterectomy and bilateral pelvic node dissection (Wertheim’s hysterectomy)
is standard of care. For young women who have not completed their families, radical trachelectomy
(surgical removal of the cervix and upper part of the vagina) and bilateral pelvic node dissection is an
alternative (see Chapter 17, Gynaecological surgery and therapeutics).
It is important to remember that in early stage IB disease, pelvic radiotherapy has similar success rates
to surgery and therefore this treatment is considered in women who are too overweight for radical surgery
or who are anaesthetically unfit.
When the disease is beyond the cervix (stages II–IV disease), radiotherapy (with or without
chemotherapy) becomes the optimal treatment. Surgery in isolation is problematic as complications can
occur (severe haemorrhage) and also achieving clearance of the tumour is unlikely. Incomplete excision
of cancer by surgery requires adjuvant postoperative radiotherapy and the combined treatments can lead
to high complication rates. As an oncological rule it is not wise to cut through cancer.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Surgery
The standard surgical operation for stage IB tumours is a radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymph node
dissection. This involves removal of the cervix, upper third of the vagina, uterus and the paracervical
tissue. Pelvic lymph node removal includes the obturator, internal and external iliac nodes. The ovaries in
premenopausal women can be spared. There is higher morbidity with this procedure over the standard
total abdominal hysterectomy. Bladder dysfunction (atony), sexual dysfunction (due to vaginal shortening)
and lymphoedema (due to removal of the pelvic lymph nodes) are not uncommon. An atonic bladder is
frequent in the immediate postoperative period due to neuronal damage from the surgery, and intermittent
self-catheterization may be required until the bladder tone returns.
Lymphoedema is variable and is described by patients as a wooden, heavy feeling to the legs with
swelling and reduced mobility. Management includes leg elevation, good skin care (e.g. avoid shaving),
massage and occasionally compression stockings. Despite these potential problems, surgery is the
preferred treatment as the cure rate is high, ovarian tissue can be preserved and the patient avoids the
complications of radiotherapy (see below).

KEY LEARNING POINTS
• Cervical cancer affects young women who may not have completed their families.
• Many cervical tumours are picked up when they are microscopic or very small volume, making
fertility-sparing treatment a possibility.
• Cone biopsy or radical trachelectomy with bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy allows preservation
of the ovaries and uterus, permitting pregnancy in the future.
• The long-term cure rate of radical trachelectomy is less well established than radical (Wertheim’s)
hysterectomy.

Radiotherapy
The aim of radiotherapy is to deliver a lethal dose of radiation to the tumour and minimize damage to the
surrounding tissues. Treatment is overseen by a radiotherapist and team. Treatment is delivered in two
ways: external beam radiotherapy (as teletherapy) and internal radiotherapy (brachytherapy). In external
beam radiotherapy, the source of the radiation is from a machine called a linear accelerator, and radiation
is delivered to the pelvis a distance from the patient (Figure 16.10). The dose of radiotherapy is carefully
calculated according to the patient and the tumour, and is usually administered as 45 Gy in total. This is
given in several treatments or ‘fractions’ as an outpatient over 4 weeks. Although this treatment is given
daily, the time of each fraction is no more than 10 minutes. Brachytherapy is a radiotherapy technique
where the radiation is delivered internally to the patient. The source of the radiation is usually selenium
and patients generally have to undergo an examination under anaesthetic to insert the rods into the uterus.
These rods are then attached to the radiotherapy source; the patient receives this internal treatment in
isolation to protect the staff. Brachytherapy delivers a high dose of radiation to the tumour source and its
harmful effects on the bladder and bowel are minimized as its effects are targeted only 5 mm from the rod.
Patients frequently suffer lethargy with treatment and may experience both bowel and bladder urgency,
which is due to the initial inflammatory effects of the radiation. Skin erythema-like sunburn is not
uncommon after external beam radiotherapy. Symptomatic treatment is usually required, such as antiinflammatory creams for skin. Around 5% of patients experience a serious side-effect that might interrupt
www.medicalebookpdf.com

treatment, for example bowel perforation. There are many long-term complications of radiotherapy that
affect only a minority of patients but do have a significant impact on patients’ quality of life. The initial
inflammatory process is replaced by fibrosis in the long term. Vaginal stenosis can cause sexual pain,
bladder damage can lead to cystitis-like symptoms, haematuria and bowel damage lead to malabsorption
and mucous diarrhoea. None of these complications can be managed easily. Patients who are
premenopausal will undergo a radiotherapy-induced menopause as the ovaries are very sensitive to small
doses of irradiation.

Figure 16.10 Linear accelerator.
Chemotherapy (cisplatin) is ideally given in conjunction with the radiotherapy, as this combination
increases cure rates more than when radiotherapy is used in isolation. It probably works by enhancing the
effects of radiotherapy and might also address micrometastases that are outside the radiotherapy field.

Palliative treatment
When it is not possible to offer curative treatment, palliation of symptoms becomes important and early
involvement of the palliative care team is essential for symptom control. The disease can be hidden from
family and friends even in the late stages of the disease; patients may be experiencing a number of
symptoms from local infiltration of the pelvis by the cancer. Malignant pain, recto and/or vesicovaginal
fistulae and bleeding may occur. Distant spread is often a very late stage of the disease. Radiotherapy may
be considered with a palliative intent; for example, a one-off treatment may be used for symptomatic bone
metastases.

Malignant disease of the vagina
Epidemiology and aetiology
Vaginal cancer is rare, accounting for just 1–2% of gynaecological malignancies. The majority of vaginal
tumours arise from metastatic spread from the endometrium and cervix. Primary cancers of the vagina are
usually squamous cell carcinomas, although clear cell adenocarcinomas and malignant melanomas occur
www.medicalebookpdf.com

occasionally. The peak age of incidence is 60–70 years of age. Sarcoma botryoides is a rare vaginal
tumour affecting young girls, with a peak incidence at 8 years of age.
More than 60% of primary vaginal tumours are HPV associated and risk factors for the disease
include previous malignant and premalignant disease of the cervix, and vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia
(VaIN), a premalignant disease with a 10% risk of progression to invasive disease. Vaginal cancer is also
sometimes seen in women with a previous history of pelvic radiotherapy.

Clinical presentation and diagnosis
Abnormal bleeding or blood-stained vaginal discharge is the most common presenting complaint.
Speculum examination reveals a mass or an ulcer, usually at the top of the vagina. Advanced disease
presents with haematuria, constipation, pelvic pain or tenesmus, a feeling of incomplete emptying of the
rectum. Diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy. Staging of vaginal cancer uses the FIGO system (Table 16.2).
An examination under anaesthetic, cystoscopy and sigmoidoscopy defines local spread. An MRI scan of
the pelvis confirms clinical findings and a computed tomography (CT) scan of the thorax and abdomen
establishes whether distant metastases are present.

Treatment
Most vaginal cancer is treated by primary radiotherapy, although early-stage tumours may be managed
surgically. Prognosis depends on stage.

Table 16.2 Staging and prognosis of vaginal cancer
Stage

Extent of disease

5 year survival
rate

I

Tumour confined to vagina

75%

II

Tumour invades the subvaginal tissue

40%

III

Tumour invades the pelvic side wall

30%

IV

Tumour involves bladder or bowel mucosa or extends beyond the true
pelvis

0–20%

(According to the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics [FIGO] staging system.)

Malignant disease of the vulva
Epidemiology and aetiology
Vulval cancer is uncommon, with just 1,000 new diagnoses every year in the UK. It was previously a
disease that exclusively affected older women, but recent years have witnessed rising incidence rates
www.medicalebookpdf.com

among young women in their 4th, 5th and 6th decades of life.
Almost 90% of vulval cancers are squamous cell carcinomas, with malignant melanoma, basal cell
carcinoma and adenocarcinoma of the Bartholin gland making up the remainder. It is generally accepted
that squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva is a disease of two separate aetiologies: high-risk HPVassociated cancers, which arise on a background of multifocal high-grade vulval intraepithelial neoplasia
(VIN 3), often in younger women; and non-HPV-associated tumours, affecting older women and
associated with the premalignant vulval condition lichen sclerosus (Table 16.3).

Clinical presentation
Vulval cancer presents as a lump or ulcer associated with bleeding or discharge that may be painful or
painless. Women may present late due to embarrassment and reluctance to be examined. Clinical
assessment should include an evaluation of the patient’s performance status and general fitness for
anaesthetic.

Table 16.3 Premalignant conditions of the vulva

On examination, a well-demarcated raised or ulcerated lesion that is hard and craggy and bleeds on
touch is highly suspicious for vulval cancer (Figure 16.11). There is often associated premalignant
change, specifically VIN in younger women, and lichen sclerosus in older women. Examination includes
an assessment of the size of the lesion, its position on the vulva and its proximity to important midline
structures, particularly the urethra and anus. Vulval tumours spread locally and metastasize first via the
inguinofemoral lymph nodes, before involving pelvic lymph nodes. Haematogenous spread to liver and
lungs is a late event. It is therefore important to examine the groins for lymph node metastases, which are
palpable as hard, craggy and fixed subcutaneous lymph node swellings.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Investigation
Patients with vulval cancer are managed by specialist gynaecological oncology MDTs in cancer centres,
where there is sufficient experience and expertise in the management of this relatively rare condition. The
team includes gynaecological cancer surgeons, clinical oncologists, specialist radiologists,
histopathologists and clinical nurse specialists who guide the investigation and treatment of the patient
according to nationally agreed guidelines.

Figure 16.11 Vulval cancer.
A biopsy is needed to confirm the diagnosis. For large tumours, this should incorporate the edge of the
lesion with the transition to normal epithelium, as this aids histological assessment. For smaller tumours,
where biopsy would effectively excise the lesion, it is important to take a clinical photograph first. The
vulva heals well and it can be difficult to locate the scar if further excision is necessary. Alternatively, the
patient may be referred prior to biopsy if there is a small but clinically suspicious lesion. An examination
under anaesthetic is sometimes useful to assess the suitability of the tumour to resection, particularly if the
tumour is very large and involving midline structures.
Most patients do not require preoperative imaging, apart from a chest X-ray to confirm suitability for
surgery. Imaging of the groins is unreliable in the detection of groin node metastases, although the high
www.medicalebookpdf.com

negative predictive power of an MRI scan of the groins can sometimes spare very unfit, elderly women
from the morbidity associated with full groin lymphadenectomy. A staging CT scan of the thorax, abdomen
and pelvis is necessary for large vulval tumours or those with obvious groin node disease, to exclude
distant metastases. Staging is according to FIGO (Table 16.4).

Treatment
Vulval excision
Radical surgical excision aiming for a clear surgical margin of at least 10 mm is standard of care.
Margins less than 5 mm are associated with unacceptably high recurrence rates and necessitate further
excision or radiotherapy. Where lesions impinge on the urethra or anus, achieving good surgical clearance
is more challenging. Sometimes it is appropriate to shrink very large or midline tumours with neoadjuvant
radiotherapy, often given in combination with chemotherapy, prior to surgery. This allows better
preservation of urinary or bowel function than upfront radical surgical excision. For small lesions,
primary closure is straightforward but larger lesions necessitate vulval reconstruction using ‘flaps’ of
skin, subcutaneous tissue and blood vessels, usually from the buttock crease or inner thigh.

Sentinel lymph node biopsy and groin lymphadenectomy
Untreated groin lymph node metastases are invariably fatal but it is not possible to predict whether groin
nodes are involved using current radiological techniques. The standard approach until recently has been
to carry out full inguinofemoral lymphadenectomy; that is, to remove all the lymph nodes in the groin for
all patients where the tumour depth of invasion exceeds 1 mm. Tumours with less than 1 mm depth of
invasion are extremely unlikely to have groin node metastases (less than 5%). Lymph drainage for lateral
vulval tumours is to the ipsilateral groin nodes, but lesions within 10 mm of the midline drain to nodes on
either side of the groin, necessitating bilateral groin lymphadenectomy. Groin lymphadenectomy is a
highly morbid procedure, associated with significant postoperative and long-term complications,
including wound healing problems, infection, venous thromboembolism, prolonged hospital stay,
lymphocyst and chronic lymphoedema. Since groin node metastases affect just 15% of patients undergoing
surgery for vulval cancer, many women are being exposed to the unnecessary risks and long-term
sequelae of groin lymphadenectomy without receiving any direct benefit from it.

Table 16.4 Staging and prognosis of vulval cancer

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Sentinel lymph node biopsy is an attempt to address this issue. The sentinel node is the first node in the
lymph node basin to receive lymphatic drainage from a tumour. The theory states that if the sentinel lymph
node is negative then the rest of the lymph node basin must be negative for metastatic disease too.
Therefore, if the sentinel lymph node can be identified and carefully checked for metastatic disease, full
groin lymphadenectomy can be reserved for those patients who really need it. Removing the sentinel
lymph node is a far less morbid procedure than full groin lymphadenectomy. The sentinel lymph node
principle has been established in tumours originating from other anatomical sites, including breast cancer
and malignant melanoma. The data in vulval cancer look extremely promising and sentinel lymph node
biopsy is likely to replace full groin lymphadenectomy as standard of care for carefully selected patients
in the near future.
Small vulval tumours (<4 cm) with greater than 1 mm depth of invasion are injected with radioactive
nucleotide on the day before surgery. Intraoperative identification of the sentinel node is by gamma probe
detection. This is facilitated by injection of blue dye into the tumour immediately preoperatively. The
sentinel node is the ‘hot’, blue node or nodes. It is important to identify bilateral sentinel lymph nodes
where tumours impinge on the midline. Careful assessment of the sentinel node(s) identifies the presence
or absence of metastatic disease; if the sentinel node is positive for metastatic disease, full groin
lymphadenectomy is indicated as a secondary procedure. False-positive nodes are unlikely but falsenegative nodes have been described in the literature and threaten the safety of the procedure; it is essential
that high standards are achieved through strict adherence to sentinel node protocols to reduce this risk.

Radiotherapy
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Adjuvant radiotherapy, given after surgery with curative intent, is indicated when vulval excision margins
are close or involved or in the presence of two or more groin node metastases. Adjuvant radiotherapy is
given to reduce the risk of recurrence. Neoadjuvant radiotherapy, given before surgery to shrink the
tumour and render it operable, is used for very large vulval tumours, particularly those that involve the
urethra or anus and where adequate surgical effort would have functional urinary or bowel implications.
Occasionally, radical radiotherapy is given instead of surgery in women who are not fit for an anaesthetic
due to severe medical comorbidities (see previous section). Chemoradiotherapy is associated with
improved cure rates compared to radiotherapy alone. Treatment of recurrent disease and palliative
treatment follows the same principles as for cervical malignancy discussed in the previous section

KEY LEARNING POINTS
• Cervical cancer is a disease commonly affecting women in low income countries. Most women
never see a health professional in their life and die from their disease in their community.
• Population-based cervical screening of adult women has prevented 70% of cases of cervical
cancer developing in the UK. HPV vaccination of children in schools is likely to reduce rates
further, but this will take many years to show benefit.
• All patients with abnormal bleeding should undergo speculum and pelvic examinations to exclude
malignant disease.
• Early-stage malignant disease of the lower genital tract is treated by surgical excision. The
principle of surgery in this context is to remove all the tumour with adequate surgical margins.
• Fertility-sparing treatment is possible in early-stage cervical tumours in young women who have
not completed their families.
• Most lower genital tract tumours are radiosensitive, but surgery is preferred as first-line treatment
due to a lower toxicity profile.
• Chemotherapy is used alongside radiotherapy to improve response rates and in the setting of
metastatic disease.

Further reading
Crosbie EJ, Brabin L (2010). Cervical cancer: problem solved? Vaccinating girls against human
papillomavirus. BJOG 117:137–42.
Crosbie EJ, Einstein MH, Franceschi S, Kitchener HC (2013). Human papillomavirus and cervical
cancer. Lancet 382:889–99.
Kitchener HC, Denton K, Soldan K, Crosbie EJ (2013). Developing role of HPV in cervical cancer
prevention. BMJ 347:f4781.

Self assessment
www.medicalebookpdf.com

CASE HISTORY
Mrs S is an 88-year-old woman who presents to the gynaecology clinic with a vulval lump. It has
been bleeding intermittently. It is very sore and she is finding it difficult to sit down. She is frail and
lives in sheltered accommodation.
A What is the most likely diagnosis?
B What are the key points in the examination and investigation?
Mrs S is found to have a 6 cm vulval tumour involving the clitoris, right labium majorum and the
introital margin. It extends to a few millimetres away from the external urethral meatus. Her staging
CT scan excludes distant metastases.
C How would you manage her?
ANSWERS
A A new vulval lump in an elderly woman is vulval cancer until proven otherwise. It is not unusual
for elderly women to put off consulting their GP because of embarrassment and reluctance to be
examined.
B It is important to inspect the vulva, noting the size of the lesion, its position on the vulva and its
proximity to the urethra and anus. A biopsy in the outpatient setting will expedite diagnosis but
may be difficult if the lesion is exquisitely tender, as the history suggests. An examination under
anaesthetic including biopsy may be necessary. Assessment of the groins is important since
enlarged, hard, fixed nodal masses may not be resectable. If distant metastases are suspected, a CT
scan of the thorax, abdomen and pelvis is important for treatment planning.
C It is important to establish up front what treatment the patient wants and whether she is fit for
general anaesthetic and the morbidity of radical vulval cancer surgery. From an oncological point
of view, the best treatment is radical vulval excision with flap reconstruction of the vulva and
bilateral groin lymphadenectomy. This may be followed by adjuvant radiotherapy if surgical
margins are close or two or more groin nodes are positive. If proximity of the tumour to the
urethra prohibits good surgical clearance without rendering Mrs S incontinent, it may be
appropriate to consider neoadjuvant (chemo)radiotherapy to shrink the tumour prior to surgery.
Radical vulval surgery and placement of a permanent suprapubic catheter is another option. If Mrs
S is not fit or does not wish to have surgery, radical radiotherapy with/without chemotherapy is
the treatment of choice. All decisions are made following full consultation with the patient and her
family and after discussion with the specialist gynaecological oncology MDT.

EMQ
A Cryotherapy.
B Directed punch biopsy.
C High-risk HPV test.
D LLETZ.
E Referral for colposcopy.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

F Repeat cervical cytology in 3 months.
G Repeat cervical cytology in 6 months.
H Repeat cervical cytology in 3 years.
I Test of cure.
For each description below, choose the SINGLE most appropriate answer from the above list of
options. Each option may be used once, more than once or not at all. What is the appropriate followup for:
1 Inadequate cervical cytology.
2 Mild dyskaryosis.
3 CIN 2 on directed punch biopsy.
4 Negative test of cure.
ANSWERS
1F The sensitivity of a single cervical smear for high-grade CIN detection is between 40 and 70%;
however, as there is slow progression for most women with CIN to cancer, if a lesion is missed
then this should be picked up on a subsequent test. Women who attend regularly for cervical
cytology have a very low risk of developing cervical cancer.
2C Women with minor cytological abnormalities undergo reflex testing with high-risk HPV. HPVnegative women are returned to routine recall, while high-risk HPV-positive women are referred
for colposcopy. Women with high-grade abnormalities are referred direct to colposcopy.
3D LLETZ is intended to be curative to remove the area of abnormality with margins.
4H Patients who have received treatment for CIN undergo a ‘test of cure’ 6 months later. This
includes a high-risk HPV test and cytological assessment. If negative, the woman is returned to
routine recall; that is, cervical screening in 3 years time. If positive, repeat colposcopy is
indicated to identify any residual, untreated CIN. A woman with a history of CIN has an
increased life time risk of recurrent CIN and cervical cancer.

SBA QUESTIONS
1 A 48-year-old woman attends the gynaecology department with prolonged vaginal bleeding. Her
last cervical smear was 8 years previously. A speculum examination reveals a suspicious-looking
cervix that bleeds on contact.
What is the most appropriate initial investigation? Choose the single best answer.
A Cervical biopsy.
B LLETZ.
C Hysteroscopy.
D MRI scan of her pelvis.
E Transabdominal ultrasound scan.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

ANSWER
A Cervical biopsy is required to make a histological diagnosis first, before imaging to stage or
surgical treatment.
2 A 32-year-old woman is diagnosed with a 3 cm stage IB1 squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix.
She is devastated because she and her partner would like to start a family.
What fertility-sparing treatment would you recommend? Choose the single best answer.
A Cold knife cone biopsy.
B LLETZ.
C Radical hysterectomy with bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy.
D Radical radiotherapy with cisplatin chemotherapy.
E Radical trachelectomy with bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy.
ANSWER
E IB1 lesions are greater than 4 cm in size but confined to the cervix. Radical hysterectomy and
bilateral pelvic node dissection (Wertheim’s hysterectomy) is the standard of care. However,
radical trachelectomy with bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy allows preservation of the ovaries
and uterus, permitting pregnancy in the future.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

www.medicalebookpdf.com

CHAPTER 17

Gynaecological surgery and therapeutics
DOUGLAS TINCELLO

Gynaecological surgery
Common gynaecological procedures
Therapeutics
Further reading
Self assessment

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
• Revise the key points of surgical anatomy applied to gynaecology.
• Understand the relative risks and benefits of abdominal and vaginal hysterectomy as well as
laparoscopic hysterectomy.
• Understand the advantages and principles of minimal access surgery.
• Understand the advantages and disadvantages of common incisions.
• Understand the purpose of careful preassessment and postoperative care.
• Be aware of how to minimize surgical risk during and immediately after surgery.
• Recognize the importance of fully informed consent.
• Be aware of the common gynaecological procedures and their risks.
• Describe the common hormonal and non-hormonal drugs used in gynaecology, and understand the
principles of safe prescribing.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Gynaecological surgery
Introduction
In this chapter, the principles of good surgical practice as they relate to gynaecology will be discussed.
Various procedures that have been discussed in other chapters are examined in more detail here, as are
therapeutics. For more detailed descriptions see Further reading.
Gynaecology is a surgical specialty; before obstetrics and gynaecology was recognized as a speciality
in its own right, most gynaecological procedures were performed by surgeons.

Key surgical anatomy
Anatomy has been discussed in Chapter 1, The Development and anatomy of the female sexual organs and
pelvis. A thorough knowledge of pelvic anatomy is essential for safe surgical practice. The major vessels
supplying the uterus and adnexae are the ovarian vessels (arising in the abdomen from the aorta and renal
artery), which enter the pelvis over the sacroiliac joints in the infundibulopelvic ligament (a fold of
peritoneum), and the uterine vessels. The uterine arteries are branches from the posterior trunk of the
internal iliac artery and run medially in the base of the broad ligament to turn upwards and course along
the lateral border of the uterus on each side. At the base of the broad ligament, the uterine artery runs 1 cm
above and 1 cm lateral to the ureter, where it is at risk of injury if care is not taken. This is much more
likely if there is scarring in the pelvis from endometriosis, or if the anatomy is distorted by any
gynaecological cancers or ovarian cysts.
The ureter runs from the kidney over the psoas muscle in line with the lateral processes of the lumbar
vertebrae and enters the pelvis over the sacroiliac joint. It runs in the posterior leaf of the broad ligament
to the level of the ischial spine, where it turns inwards and forwards to enter the bladder. In order to
safely dissect the uterine arteries away from the ureter, the bladder is reflected downwards at an
abdominal hysterectomy or upwards at a vaginal hysterectomy. The bladder is emptied before open and
laparoscopic surgery to protect it from injury. The bladder is intimately associated with the anterior
vaginal wall and the front of the uterine cervix and isthmus. The vesicouterine fold of peritoneum must be
opened to allow the bladder to be reflected before clamping the uterine arteries during hysterectomy. It is
for these reasons that bladder and ureteric injuries may occur during gynaecological surgery. If there is
any doubt as to the position of the ureter, the broad ligament can be opened by dividing the round
ligament, and the ureter can always been seen on the reflected peritoneum.
The sigmoid colon runs along the left side wall of the abdomen and pelvis and becomes
retroperitoneal midway along its passage through the pelvis. In a healthy pelvis the rectum falls away
when the uterus is lifted, to allow clear identification of the rectum and posterior vagina in the pouch of
Douglas. Scarring (particularly from endometriosis) can obliterate the pouch of Douglas and increase the
risk of rectal injury considerably. Also, after hysterectomy, the anatomical planes between vagina and
rectum are less easily seen and so rectal injury can occur at the time of sacrocolpopexy.
For a discussion of the anatomy of the ligaments and fascial supports relevant to prolapse see Chapters
1, The Development and anatomy of the female sexual organs and pelvis, and Chapter 10,
Urogynaecology and pelvic floor problems.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Hysterectomy
Hysterectomy is one of the commonest surgical procedures in gynaecology and therefore given special
mention here. Other routine gynaecological operations are described more briefly later. Hysterectomy is
commonly performed for heavy or painful or irregular periods, when medical treatment or less invasive
surgery such as endometrial ablation has failed. When the uterus is enlarged by fibroids or significant
adhesions are expected, or it is planned to remove the ovaries, hysterectomy is usually performed
abdominally. Although a complete description of abdominal hysterectomy is outside the scope of this
chapter, the procedure involves taking three pedicles:
• The infundibulopelvic ligament, which contains the ovarian vessels.
• The uterine artery.
• The angles of the vault of the vagina, which contain vessels ascending from the vagina; the ligaments to
support the uterus can be taken with this pedicle or separately.
In vaginal hysterectomy, the same steps are taken but in the reverse order. If the uterus is of normal
size, hysterectomy can be performed vaginally, even in the absence of significant prolapse. In prolapse
surgery, hysterectomy is commonly performed vaginally as part of the correction of anatomical prolapse,
although there is an increasing awareness that the uterus is an innocent ‘passenger’ in the prolapse
process and prolapse surgery can be done without removing the uterus.
The choice of abdominal or vaginal route for hysterectomy has to balance the benefits and risks of
each approach (Table 17.1). Published data have failed to demonstrate a lower morbidity after vaginal
surgery, but many studies have included women undergoing prolapse who are older with more
comorbidities. It is now generally agreed that vaginal surgery requires a shorter time in hospital and less
recovery time before full mobility and activity is resumed. Increasingly, laparoscopy is used to aid
vaginal surgery, termed laparoscopic-aided vaginal hysterectomy (LAVH) in which the first two steps are
completed laparoscopically and the third vaginally. The entire operation can be performed
laparoscopically, with the uterus removed through the vagina and the open vault closed with laparoscopic
sutures, termed total laparoscopic hysterectomy (TLH). Although at the moment the procedure time and
hence anaesthetic may be longer, postoperative pain and recovery time will be less. As the specialty of
minimal access surgery (MAS) evolves, newer and more effective laparoscopic tools and energy
modalities are being developed, which will further reduce the operative time.

Table 17.1 Hysterectomy routes
Procedure

Abdominal
hysterectomy

Key points

Advantages

Disadvantages

Abdominal incision
Uterus, cervix removed
Tubes and ovaries can be removed
together at the same procedure
Can be performed laparoscopically

Allows full
inspection of
pelvis
Oophorectomy is
straightforward
Can remove large
fibroid uterus

Abdominal incision
More pain
Longer recovery period
TLH/LAVH will offset
these disadvantages

No abdominal

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Vaginal
hysterectomy

Vaginal incision
Cervix and uterus removed
Ovaries and Fallopian tube not
removed
Can be combined with vaginal wall
surgery
Can be assisted laparoscopically

incision
Rapid recovery
Suitable for
spinal
anaesthesia
Appropriate for
frail/eldery

Ovaries not removed
Surgical access can be
limited
Not suitable for large
fibroid uterus

LAVH, laparoscopic-aided vaginal hysterectomy; TLH, total laparoscopic hysterectomy.
Hysterectomy by any route carries some specific complications. Some risks can be minimized by
careful surgical planning and preoperative preparation. It should be remembered that removal of the
ovaries is not essential if hysterectomy is being performed for benign indications, and the decision about
whether to do so should be made in discussion with the patient. For postmenopausal women undergoing
surgery, oophorectomy may be a sensible option because it removes the low risk of later ovarian cancer.
For a woman who is still menstruating regularly, then it would be usual to leave the ovaries in situ, to
preserve endogenous ovarian function and prevent early onset of menopausal symptoms and osteoporosis.
For women in the perimenopausal years who may have some early menopausal symptoms and a degree of
menstrual irregularity, the decision about removing the ovaries should be individualized in relation to
personal preferences regarding hormone replacement therapy (HRT) use and any risk factors for later
cancer of the ovary. In general, there is a move towards conservation of the ovaries.

Complications of hysterectomy
• Haemorrhage (intra- or immediate postoperative).
• Deep vein thrombosis (pelvic surgery).
• New bladder symptoms (both overactive bladder and stress incontinence).
• Higher incidence of vaginal prolapse after hysterectomy for any cause.
• Bladder injury (uncommon).
• Ureteric injury (rare).
• Rectal injury (rare).
• Vesicovaginal or rectovaginal fistula (consequence of injury) (very rare).
• Early onset of menopausal symptoms (if ovaries left in situ).
• Immediate onset of menopausal symptoms (if ovaries removed in a premenopausal woman).
• Thromboembolism.
A word of caution when considering oophorectomy for a patient with significant menstrual cycle pain:
in the absence of proven endometriosis it is wise to be careful, since some non-gynaecological conditions
can cause pain in a cyclical manner (e.g. irritable bowel syndrome). In these cases a 3-month trial of
gonadotrophin releasing hormone (GnRH) analogues to suppress ovarian function prior to surgery can be
useful to be confident that oophorectomy will alleviate the pain if it is relieved by the medication. On the
www.medicalebookpdf.com

other hand, if one is sure the pain is related to the ovaries, then performing hysterectomy without
oophorectomy can leave a patient with ongoing pain, and later oophorectomy can be technically difficult,
with adhesions and with the ovary adherent to the pelvic side wall and ureter.
Exceptions to the principle of ovarian conservation in young patients would be a woman with
significant and debilitating premenstrual syndrome where oophorectomy would alleviate this, or a woman
with severe endometriosis, where oophorectomy is necessary to achieve a cure. Oophorectomy in young
women will usually require immediate recourse to systemic HRT, which is not always without
complications (see Chapter 8, The Menopause and postreproductive health).

KEY LEARNING POINTS
• The bladder and ureters are closely related to the uterus, cervix and uterine vessels and are at risk
of injury during hysterectomy.
• Abdominal hysterectomy has a longer recovery time than vaginal hysterectomy but makes removal
of large fibroids and ovaries easier.
• Hysterectomy by any route increases the risk of new urinary and prolapse symptoms.
• Oophorectomy is not mandatory at the time of hysterectomy.
• The decision whether to remove the ovaries should consider the patient’s age, presence of
menopausal symptoms, pain and the individual risk of later ovarian cancer.

Preassessment
In modern medical practice, patients are admitted for as short a time as is practical and safe for the
patient. As a result, the presurgical preparation of patients in now often performed in a preassessment
clinic (PAC) up to 2 weeks before the date of surgery. At preassessment a clinical review is undertaken,
usually by a junior doctor or specialist nurse, to confirm the patient’s medical condition is still present
and to identify any new or existing medical comorbidities that may affect the risks of anaesthesia or
increase the risk of intra- and postoperative complications. All patients will have a full blood count
(FBC) and blood group and serum save (or a full cross-match in advance if significant bleeding is
anticipated), and patients over the age of 50 or thereabouts, plus those with known cardiac, renal or
respiratory problems, will also have serum biochemistry measured (urea, electrolytes, renal function,
hepatic function), a chest X-ray and electrocardiography (ECG) performed. These results will be
available for the surgeon and anaesthetist in advance of the surgery.
The PAC is a valuable opportunity to arrange additional investigations and make specific surgical
plans for high-risk patients. For instance, patients with significant cardiac failure or severe respiratory
disease may require echocardiography or lung function test. Patients with known coagulation disorders, or
those taking long-term anticoagulants such as warfarin, can be reviewed by the haematologist and a
detailed bridging plan prepared. Many hospitals support their PACs with consultant anaesthetists who
provide expert review of high-risk patients even before the decision for surgery has been made, and who
can make detailed plans for the care of the very high-risk patient, including the provision of a high
dependency or intensive care bed in the immediate postoperative period.
The risk of thromboembolism is best assessed at the PAC so that plans can be made for postoperative
thromboprophylaxis. The combined oral contraceptive pill (COCP) should be stopped 4 weeks prior to
surgery and alternative contraception used. HRT should also be stopped, although there is some
www.medicalebookpdf.com

disagreement about this. Covering women with low-molecular weight heparin (LMWH) even for minor
surgery would be an option if HRT is continued. All women must be mobilized early after surgery, and
giving women the expectation that this will be the case is useful. All women are given thromboembolic
stockings (TEDS) and kept hydrated. LMWH is given according to standard risk assessment.

Thromboprophylaxis in surgery
• Low risk: surgery less than 30 min without risk factors.
• Moderate risk:
• use TEDS and LMWH;
• surgery more than 30 min, high body mass index (BMI), varicose veins, sepsis, immobility,
comorbidity.
• High risk:
• use TEDS and LMWH for 5 days or until mobile;
• cancer, prolonged surgery, previous thromboembolic event, thrombophilia or >3 of moderate risk
factors.
PACs are also an opportunity for the patient to discuss any remaining concerns or questions she may
have about her impending surgery, and it is considered good practice to use preassessment appointments
as an opportunity to obtain written consent from the patient at a time slightly distant from the anxieties of
the day of surgery (see below).

Surgical practice and decision making
Safe surgical practice and careful decision making begins in the outpatient clinic. With the exception of
cancer, most gynaecology conditions we treat affect quality of life and are not life-threatening. It is
important, therefore, to work with the patient to ensure that all available conservative and non-medical
interventions have been tried or at least discussed before considering surgery. Although in the modern
world anaesthesia and surgery are safe, any surgical procedure does carry risks and complications, some
of which can rarely be life-threatening or cause significant physical morbidity. It is one of the duties of a
professional to ensure that his or her patients are made aware of all the issues. Many patients seem to
consider surgery to be the only intervention that will make a lasting difference and can be overoptimistic
about the likely outcome. The best way to avoid surgical complications and mishaps is not to operate!
Having made the decision to perform an operation, one must be careful to consider the alternatives, to
arrive at the best operation for that patient with that condition. Abdominal surgery requires longer
recovery than vaginal surgery, and involves longer incisions usually, while laparoscopic surgery requires
a patient to endure a longer anaesthetic (often) while in a steep Trendelenburg position (head down). So,
for instance, one might decide to avoid an abdominal approach on a very frail elderly patient with
comorbidities in favour of a laparoscopic or vaginal approach. One might decide to avoid complex
laparoscopic surgery in a morbidly obese woman, or one might decide against bilateral oophorectomy in
a patient known to have had several previous laparotomies, extensive endometriosis and intra-abdominal
adhesions. In complex cases, it is often prudent to seek the views of colleagues, either in an informal
discussion or more recently in the format of multidisciplinary team (MDT) meetings as best practice. At
www.medicalebookpdf.com

the MDT meeting the patient can be discussed and the views and expertise of surgeon, anaesthetist,
specialist nurse (e.g. oncology or urogynaecology) and other specialists (e.g. medical oncologist,
pathologist, urologist, colorectal surgeon) can be shared to decide on the safest and most likely to be
effective procedure. MDTs are extremely valuable in gynaecological oncology, urogynaecology and
severe endometriosis.
During surgery, careful tissue handling throughout is a prerequisite. Careful dissection of tissues and
gentle handling of other organs and the abdominal wall will both minimize the risk of surgical trauma but
will also reduce the release of acute phase proteins and inflammatory mediators. This is very likely to
make the patient feel better and less fatigued in the immediate postoperative period. Careful and
methodical surgery is the key to successful outcomes, particularly when faced with difficult surgery and
distorted anatomy. The key principles are to restore the anatomy to as close to normal as possible by
dividing adhesions and mobilizing adjacent organs before doing one’s standard procedure. In the modern
era, there is no place for cavalier ‘have a go’ attitudes in surgery, and if one encounters difficulty and
complexity, it is sound practice to call an experienced colleague to assist you before things become too
challenging.

Common incisions
For vaginal surgery, there are really only two incisions to consider. For vaginal prolapse the surgical
incision is usually a midline one in whichever wall is affected. This allows the skin to be reflected and to
gain access to the fascia and underlying tissues. For vaginal hysterectomy the vaginal mucosa around the
cervix is excised to gain access to the uterosacral ligaments and vesicouterine space and pouch of
Douglas. The morbidity associated with vaginal incisions is very low; many patients experience almost
no pain after vaginal surgery. Occasionally, adhesion bands can form between the anterior and posterior
vagina, which can be troublesome and interfere with intercourse. These can often be broken down with
the fingers but sometimes an examination under anaesthesia is required.
For abdominal gynaecological surgery the choice of incision is usually between a transverse lower
abdominal incision (Pfannenstiel incision) and a subumbilical midline incision (Figure 17.1).
Pfannenstiel incisions are ideal for uncomplicated gynaecological procedures. The incision is quick to
make and open, since there is no posterior rectus sheath at the level of the incision, it being below the
arcuate line. It is a strong incision, which is not prone to herniation and is cosmetically attractive. The
major drawback with the Pfannenstiel is that it cannot be easily extended, so in situations where the
anatomy is unexpectedly distorted, or some unanticipated pathology is encountered, the surgeon is forced
to make an inverted T incision to improve access, which is neither strong in repair, nor attractive.

Figure 17.1 Incisions used in gynaecological surgery.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Pfannenstiel incision
• Transversely, two finger breadths above the pubic symphysis.
• Strong when repaired with low risk of herniation or dehiscence.
• Not very painful (limited to one or two dermatomes).
• Cosmetically attractive (lower than the ‘underwear line’).
• Cannot be easily extended or made larger.
• Surgical access limited to pelvic organs.

Midline incision
• Vertically from pubic symphysis up to umbilicus.
• Less strong; prone to herniation or dehiscence.
• More painful (involves several dermatomes).
• Cosmetically unattractive.
• Can easily be extend around umbilicus up to the xiphisternum.
• Gives excellent surgical access.
A midline (or paramedian) incision is often favoured by oncologists, and also when significant
surgical difficulty is anticipated (e.g. from adhesions, large fibroids or ovarian cysts). Although less
strong than a Pfannenstiel incision, the major advantage of the midline incision is that is can easily be
extended to provide excellent surgical access. A large incision will of course cause more postoperative
pain, which can increase the risk of respiratory infection by limiting breathing and coughing efforts. The
author recommends a vertical incision in emergency cases when the exact underlying diagnosis is not
entirely clear (e.g. a pelvic mass in a pyrexial patient) to allow flexibility of access should the findings be
unexpected.
Laparoscopic surgery holds several advantages over open abdominal surgery. Laparoscopic entry
wounds are usually less than 1 cm in length and thus cause much less postoperative pain than an open
wound. The risk of herniation is very low. The lack of pain and extensive external wounds mean that
patients become mobile after surgery very quickly and most laparoscopic procedures (even hysterectomy)
allow for hospital discharge within 24–48 hours. The laparoscopic approach allows for enhanced
visibility for some pelvic procedures, especially those deep in the pelvis, such as excision of infiltrating
endometriosis or performing the mesh attachment at a laparoscopic sacrocolpopexy. Although the
operating time may be longer than with open surgery, the more rapid discharge from hospital makes
laparoscopic surgery more cost-effective in general, although there are limited data suggesting it also
leads to better surgical outcomes.

KEY LEARNING POINTS
• Surgical preassessment is an important part of patient care and allows personalized plans of care
to be made for those with comorbidities.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• Multidisciplinary review of planned cases can be helpful in deciding on the safest approach to
complex or medically unfit patients.
• Surgical incisions should be made after consideration of the requirements for surgical access and
potential difficulties, but also the strength and recovery time for each type of incision.
• Many gynaecological procedure are performed by minimal access techniques, thereby minimizing
incisional pain and recovery.

Sutures
Surgical suture materials are essential elements for surgical practice, necessary for tying off vascular
pedicles, closing the vaginal vault at hysterectomy and repairing abdominal and vaginal incisions. The
ideal suture material is one that allows secure knot tying without slippage, provokes little tissue reaction,
does not increase the risk of infection, retains enough tensile strength until the healing process has laid
down enough collagen and connective tissue to restore integrity of the tissues and can be wholly
reabsorbed by the body. Such a material does not exist! The choice of suture for any particular purpose
will depend on which of the above characteristics are considered most important. Broadly, sutures can be
characterized by two properties: monofilament versus multifilament, and absorbable versus nonabsorbable (Table 17.2).

Table 17.2 Examples of sutures used in gynaecology
Absorbable
(>50% strength retention)

Non-absorbable

Multifilament

Polyglactin (Vicryl®) (21 days)

Silk
Braided Nylon
Braided polyester/dacron (Ethibond®)

Monofilament

Catgut (rarely used) (7–10 days)
Polyglactin (Vicryl®) (14–21 days)
Poliglecaprone (Monocryl®) (7 days)
Polydioxanone (PDS®) (28 days)

Nylon
Polyester/dacron
Polypropylene (Prolene®)
Stainless steel (rarely used in gynaecology)

Multifilament sutures are generally more secure in knot tying than monofilament sutures, due to greater
friction from the braided filaments, and so will require fewer throws to secure the knot and thus reduce
the amount of suture material used. Suture volume is relevant to the risk of surgical site infection, as more
foreign material increases this risk. Conversely, multifilament sutures carry a greater risk of infection than
monofilament sutures, because the spaces between the filaments retain bacteria. Monofilament sutures
will generally cause less tissue reaction.
For most indications in gynaecology, absorbable sutures will be preferred to non-absorbable sutures.
Most modern sutures are polymers of synthetic material that can be broken down by tissue enzymes and
macrophages over time. The time taken to degrade is material dependent but is also influenced by
inflammation, infection and the general health of the patient. The choice of which material is used depends
www.medicalebookpdf.com

on the length of time for which tensile strength is required. Non-absorbable ‘permanent’ sutures are not
absorbed so retain their strength indefinitely, but carry a risk of erosion through the skin or vaginal
epithelium in the long term.
Non-absorbable sutures are reserved for specific situations where long-term strength is required. In
gynaecology, this is most often for the closure of midline abdominal incisions, incisions in cases of
malignancy or in a patient with major chronic illness compromising healing (e.g. chronic kidney disease,
diabetes), or in a patient where the same incision has been opened more than once before. Other situations
where non-absorbable sutures may be used are for colposuspension for incontinence or for attachment of
the mesh during sacrocolpopexy.

Consent and surgical risk
Obtaining valid consent for surgery is an integral step of the care of the patient. Patients must be provided
with all the relevant information about the planned procedure including the likely success rate or outcome,
as well as the usual recovery time and any particular measures to be observed during that recovery.
Additionally, patients need to be made aware of the potential complications of surgery, and how such
events may affect the patient’s recovery and eventual outcome. Complications that can be deemed
common (usually an incidence of 1% or more) should always be discussed with the patient, and any
serious complications (i.e. those with risk of long-term adverse effects, including death, long-term
morbidity or disability) should also be mentioned, even if rare.
From a legal perspective, consent is considered to be a continuous process rather than a single event.
Written consent is usually obtained, but it should be remembered that the process is much more than
completing the form. The physician has a duty to ensure that the patient has been provided with all the
relevant information in a way that she can understand, and should be able to demonstrate understanding of
this information. It is good practice to ask the patient to repeat back her understanding of what she has
been told. Doctors are often anxious to avoid creating unnecessary anxiety by discussing rare
complications, but as long as one explains the context and relatively rarity of such events, it is important
to be as comprehensive as possible and to ensure the discussion has been carefully and completely
documented. The discussion and, where possible, local- or surgeon-specific success rates and
complication rates, should be written in the patient’s case notes in addition to the completion of the
consent form. It is also good practice to record that the patient has been able to repeat the information to
demonstrate understanding. The person obtaining consent should ideally be someone competent to
undertake the procedure, who understands what is involved and the risks, rather than delegating the task to
the most junior member of the surgical team.
Thus, it can be seen that obtaining and recording consent can be a time-consuming process and so
ideally should be concluded and documented before the time of admission; for example, during an
outpatient consultation. It is very easy to fall into the habit of obtaining written consent on the day of
surgery, but this is not ideal, although is acceptable as long as the procedure, outcome and risks have been
discussed previously. Careful counselling and accurate, detailed record keeping is essential.
The issue of mental capacity to consent is occasionally encountered. Mental capacity is the ability of a
person to make decisions for themselves about things that influence their lives, from simple one, to
complex decisions, including the decision to undergo medical or surgical treatment. In a legal context it
refers to decisions that may have legal consequences for the individual or for others. In terms of surgical
practice, capacity is usually obvious from contact with the patient, but in cases of long-term mental illness
or dementia, the issue of whether the patient has capacity is important and requires to be formally
evaluated.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

From a legal perspective, a person lacks capacity when at the time of decision making he or she is
unable to make or communicate that decision due to an ‘impairment of, or a disturbance in the function of
the mind or brain’. Assessing capacity has two stages: firstly, is there an impairment or disturbance to the
mind or brain; and secondly, is this sufficient to render the person unable to make this decision. It should
be remembered that capacity is task and time specific. Thus, a person with dementia, for example, may
have capacity for simple decisions (e.g. to have a cup of tea), but not for a complex decision, or that
capacity might vary from day to day.
The key issue for health professionals is to ensure that capacity has been assessed. Legally, having
capacity is distinct from the nature of the decision made, and individuals with capacity may well make
decisions that others regard as rash, foolish or dangerous. However, if capacity can be demonstrated, the
individual can make whatever decision they wish! Where capacity is in doubt, the responsibility to
ascertain capacity lies with the health care professional, and sometimes it may be necessary to seek the
opinion of more than one practitioner. Many hospitals have a formal process where a panel will make the
decision. Where capacity is absent or unclear, clinical decisions have to be made on the basis of what is
in the patient’s best interests. This can be difficult to establish and will often require discussion with
family members or friends who can advise on what the patient would usually wish or any previous
expressions or views made when the patient had capacity. An individual will be protected by law when
making a clinical decision where they have ‘reasonable belief’ that the person lacks consent and that the
course of action is in the person’s best interest. This is limited by certain things, including any advance
decision by the individual (e.g. a ‘living will’), or by a legal judgement. In many cases, the issue of
capacity is easy to determine, but sometimes it can be difficult, and identifying the patient’s ‘best
interests’ can also be difficult. If in doubt, clinicians should seek advice from their employer’s legal team.
Occasionally, decisions on care need to be made by court ruling.
On the day of surgery, the surgical MDT must work together to ensure that the anaesthetic, surgical
procedure and recovery occurs efficiently and without complications or adverse events. Communication
within the team is of paramount importance and will often begin before the day of surgery with discussion
between the surgeon and anaesthetist regarding issues identified at preassessment.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has developed a safe surgery checklist that is recommended
for use for all surgical activities. It is a written checklist developed to minimize surgical adverse events.
Worldwide the crude mortality rate after surgery is between 0.5% and 5% and postoperative
complications occur in up to 25% of cases. In higher income countries, nearly half of adverse events in
hospital relate to surgical care, one-half of which are considered to have been avoidable. The checklist is
a validated and tested tool to reduce these risks, which includes specific tasks before, during and after
surgery to ensure the whole team is aware of issues relating to the specific case about to be performed
(Figure 17.2). It includes elements to ensure anaesthesia safety, identification of the correct surgical site
and confirmation of the procedure planned, discussion of any specific or non-standard elements to the
procedure and attention to careful postoperative care in the immediate recovery period.

KEY LEARNING POINTS
• Consent for surgery is a continuous process, and should be fully documented.
• Where possible, local figures for cure and complications should be given to the patient and
included in the written notes recorded.
• Mental capacity is required to give consent.
• Assessing mental capacity where doubt exists is a formal process and must be carefully
documented. Formal legal advice may be necessary.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

• Where capacity is lacking, treatment decisions can only be made if they can be shown to be in the
patient’s best interests.

Postoperative care and recovery
The first 48–72 hours after surgery are when the patient is most at risk of immediate surgical
complications. Nursing and medical care is focussed on identifying early signs of sepsis, and the source
of any infection, haemorrhage or thromboembolic disease. The patient will have regular (usually 4
hourly) observations of temperature, pulse and blood pressure in the first 24 hours to identify the clinical
signs of infection or hypovolaemic collapse. Most patients will be given intravenous fluids for the first
12–24 hours after surgery until they can resume eating and drinking, but the timing of resumption of oral
intake will vary depending on the length of surgery, whether the abdominal cavity was opened and
whether there were any intraoperative complications that might require delayed oral feeding.
The postoperative ward round is a daily (or twice daily) opportunity to review the patient’s progress.
The patient should be asked about the presence and site of any pain, particularly pain that is more than one
would expect from a recent surgical wound or which is in a different site. The pulse, temperature and
blood pressure should be checked, and signs of conjunctival pallor or a thready pulse should be sought, as
young patients may often compensate for blood loss with minimal changes in pulse rate or blood pressure
at first. For all cases of either abdominal or vaginal surgery, the abdomen should be palpated for
localized tenderness (suggesting a haematoma or focus of infection), peritonism or distension, and bowel
sounds should be checked (for return of peristalsis and exclude obstruction or ileus). The abdominal
wound should be checked for inflammation, bruising or discharge. If drains are present, these should be
checked. If there are any concerns about bleeding or infection after vaginal surgery, a gentle pelvic
examination is appropriate to exclude a haematoma or collection. Routine blood sampling for
haemoglobin concentration can be done on the second postoperative day, and urea and electrolytes will
need to be checked for those patients who remain on intravenous fluids.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 17.2 WHO surgical safety check list. (Adapted from WHO, 2009.)
Generally patients should be encouraged to mobilize as soon as possible and oral intake resumed at
the earliest opportunity. Single-dose antibiotic prophylaxis is usually give intraoperatively for all
gynaecological surgery, but one should be mindful of avoiding empirical prescription of antibiotics in the
postoperative period. It is common to see a low-grade pyrexia in the first 12–24 hours as a manifestation
of the release of acute phase proteins, particularly interleukin-1, and this will usually settle without
intervention. Persistent pyrexia, or pyrexia above 39°C, should be treated. After clinical examination to
exclude obvious wound infection or chest infection, a screen should be undertaken by means of urine
culture, vaginal swabs and blood cultures before commencing antibiotics in all patients, to ensure that
appropriate antibiotic sensitivities can be checked. Where the focus of infection is identified or
suspected, liaison with microbiology will ensure appropriate choice of antibiotic based on local
resistance patterns, and this is even more important when no source of infection has been identified.
Remember that intravenous cannulae or central lines can often be the source of infection.
Wound dressings should be removed by 48–72 hours after surgery and abdominal wound sutures are
usually removed on day 5 for Pfannenstiel incisions or day 7–10 for midline incisions.
Thromboprophylaxis commences on the day of surgery until discharge, in the form of TEDs and LMWH.
In patients with gynaecological malignancy, this will often be continued for longer. There is growing
evidence that the risk window for thromboemobolic disease can last for up to 6 weeks, so many clinicians
recommend their patients continue to wear antiembolic stockings for that length of time. The postoperative
review is lastly a good opportunity to debrief the patient about her surgery and to address any remaining
concerns about wound care and recovery after discharge, resumption of normal activity and intercourse,
www.medicalebookpdf.com

and the need or not for HRT. Usually 6 weeks is recommended before resumption of full activity and
intercourse after major surgery, based on the time required for scar tissue to regain full strength, but there
is little evidence supporting this recommendation. For less major surgery a gradual resumption of activity
from about 4 weeks is acceptable.

Common gynaecological procedures
Full details of each procedure are beyond the scope of this book, but a brief summary of the most common
procedures, indications and complications are presented in Table 17.3.

Hysteroscopy (Figures 17.3, 17.4)
Hysteroscopy involves passing a small-diameter telescope, either flexible or rigid, through the cervix to
directly inspect the uterine cavity. Excellent images can be obtained. A flexible hysteroscope may be used
in the outpatient setting. Rigid instruments employ circulating fluids and therefore can be used to visualize
the uterine cavity even if the woman is bleeding.

Indications
Any abnormal bleeding from the uterus can be investigated by hysteroscopy, including:
• Postmenopausal bleeding.
• Irregular menstruation, intermenstrual bleeding and postcoital bleeding.
• Persistent heavy menstrual bleeding.

Table 17.3 Common gynaecological surgeries

www.medicalebookpdf.com

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 17.3 Flexible fibreoptic hysteroscope.

Figure 17.4 View of endometrial cavity demonstrating Asherman’s adhesions.
• Persistent discharge.
• Suspected uterine malformations.
• Suspected Asherman’s syndrome.
• Essure hysteroscopic sterilization.

Complications
• Perforation of the uterus.
• Cervical damage – if cervical dilatation is necessary.
• If there is infection present, hysteroscopy can cause ascending infection.
An operating hysteroscope can also be used to resect endometrial pathology such as fibroids and
polyps and uterine septums.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Laparoscopy (Figures 17.5, 6 and 17.7)
Laparoscopy allows visualization of the peritoneal cavity. This involves insertion of a needle called a
Veress needle into a suitable puncture point in the umbilicus. This allows insufflation of the peritoneal
cavity with carbon dioxide so that a larger instrument can be inserted. The majority of instruments used
for diagnostic laparoscopy are 5 mm in diameter, and 10 mm instruments are used for operative
laparoscopy. More recently, a 2 mm laparoscope has become available.

Indications
• Suspected ectopic pregnancy.
• Ovarian cyst accident and acute pelvic pain.
• Undiagnosed pelvic pain.
• Tubal patency testing.
• Sterilization.
Operative laparoscopy can be used to perform ovarian cystectomy or oophorectomy and to treat
endometriosis with cautery or laser. As discussed above, more extensive laparoscopic work is now
performed for hysterectomy, lymph node biopsy, omentectomy and myomectomy.

Complications
Complications are uncommon, but include damage to any of the intra-abdominal structures, such as bowel
and major blood vessels. The bladder is always emptied prior to the procedure to avoid bladder injury.
Incisional hernia has been reported.
eResource 17.1
Laparoscopy
http://www.routledgetextbooks.com/textbooks/tenteachers/gynaecologyv17.1.php

Cystoscopy (Figures 17.8, 17.9)
Cystoscopy involves passing a small-diameter telescope, either flexible or rigid, through the urethra into
the bladder. Excellent images of both these structures can be obtained. A cystoscope with an operative
channel can be used to biopsy any abnormality, perform bladder neck injection, retrieve stones and resect
bladder tumours.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 17.5 Schematic diagram showing laparoscope.

Figure 17.6 Laparoscopic view of bilateral endometriomas.

Figure 17.7 Laproscopic view showing Filshie clip on the right Fallopian tube.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Figure 17.8 Diagram showing the cystoscopic procedure.

Indications
• Haematuria.
• Recurrent urinary tract infection.
• Sterile pyuria.
• Short history of irritative symptoms.
• Suspected bladder abnormality (e.g. diverticulum, stones, fistula).
• Assessment of bladder neck.

Complications
• Urinary tract infection.
• Rarely, bladder perforation.

Figure 17.9 Cystoscopic view of bladder papilloma.

Therapeutics

www.medicalebookpdf.com

The drugs used for particular conditions have been described in the relevant chapters. For reference these
are summarized here in Table 17.4. Readers are advised to refer to the British National Formulary (BNF)
for further information and contraindications.

Table 17.4 Common gynaecological therapeutic agents

Further reading
Jayson GC, Kohn EC, Kitchener HC, Ledermann JA (2014). Ovarian cancer. Lancet 384(9951):1376–
88.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

Mental capacity advice from the British Medical Association: http://bma.org.uk/practical-support-atwork/ethics/mental-capacity.
British National Formulary http://www.bnf.org.
The UK Mental Capacity Act: http://www.mentalhealth.org.uk/help-information/mental-health-az/M/mental-capacity-act-2005/.
RCOG Guide to Consent https://www.rcog.org.uk/guidelines.
WHO Safe Surgery Checklist website: http://www.who.int/patientsafety/safesurgery/en/.

Self assessment
CASE HISTORY
A 34-year-old woman has been seen in clinic with severe dysmenorrhoea and pelvic pain and a
possible diagnosis of endometriosis. She would also like to become pregnant. An ultrasound has
shown a normal uterus and ‘kissing ovaries’, with a 6-cm endometrioma on the right ovary. She
would like to undergo a laparoscopy for diagnosis and treatment.
A What additional points in the history should be sought?
B What preoperative checks and tests should be made for this woman?
C What consent process should take place?
ANSWERS
A The gynaecological history should cover length of symptoms, severity, interference with normal
function and her expectations of surgery. In particular, symptoms of dyschexia are important to
assess likelihood of rectovaginal nodes.
The length of time trying for a pregnancy, treatments tried and partner’s fertility assessment are
vital here, as they may affect a decision to treat tubal or ovarian disease. The balance of fertility
issues and symptomatology are crucial in surgery for endometriosis (for example, if she is about
to undergo in-vitro fertilization, then minimal intervention is advised beyond draining large
endometriomas if they will affect egg collection).
As in all surgery past medical history is important, as is previous surgery on the abdomen,
which may make laparoscopic surgery more hazardous.
The woman reveals that she has not yet tried for a pregnancy but has just come off the pill and
is awaiting a period. She has been tricycling this for 2 years since endometriosis was suspected
from symptoms. Initially she felt better but her pain is returning. She has developed new
abdominal swelling over the last year, and attributes this to the endometrioma. She does not have
dyspareunia or dyschexia. At the moment her symptoms are of greatest importance.
She reveals that she has asthma, although she rarely takes an inhaler. However, she was once
hospitalized after contracting the ‘flu, requiring nebulizers.
B She requires referral for anaesthetic assessment for her asthma. She requires a FBC and group and
save for surgery. A pregnancy test is very important, and she must use contraception in the cycle in
www.medicalebookpdf.com

which her surgery will fall.
C Initial informed consent will cover the procedure and the risks of surgery. Written information
should be given. Common complications are written down (or printed) on the consent form
including perforation of uterus, damage to bladder, bowel or viscera, procedures to repair damage
and laparotomy.
It is good practice to record details of the consultation that are covered, which should include
insertion of a levonorgestrel intrauterine system (LNG-IUS) (but not appropriate if she wishes to
conceive), complications that are more likely with endometriosis and the extent of procedure
planned. For example, it is useful to record that a discussion has taken place that if the pelvis is
frozen and inoperable, the procedure will end without full treatment of the endometriosis. In this
situation a referral to the nearest endometriosis centre should be made, where elective surgery
with a general surgeon might be planned.
On the day of procedure confirmation of consent will be completed, and further questions
answered.

EMQ
A Internal iliac artery.
B Uterus.
C Fallopian tube.
D Uterine artery.
E Ovaries.
F Pudendal artery.
G Aorta.
H Ovarian artery.
I Cervix.
For each description below, choose the SINGLE most appropriate answer from the above list of
options. Each option may be used once, more than once or not at all.
1 Contained in the infundibulopelvic ligament.
2 The origin of the uterine artery.
3 Should always be removed at hysterectomy to cure endometriosis.
4 The ureter is at surgical risk where it runs close to this structure.
ANSWERS
1H The ovarian vessels arise from the aorta just below the renal artery. At the level of the pelvic
brim the ovarian vessels cross in front of the ureter and pass into the infundibular-pelvic fold of
the broad ligament.
2A The uterine artery originates from the anterior branch of the internal iliac, as do the other vessels
supplying the pelvis.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

3E When hysterectomy and pelvic clearance is performed to provide relief from endometriosis, it is
advisable to remove the ovaries. Not doing so may allow continued hormonal cycling and
recurrence of pelvic endometriosis. Further surgery to remove the ovaries later would be high
risk, due to the presence of adhesions around the ovaries that tend to seal to the pelvic side wall.
4D The ureter is closely related to the uterine artery at the level of the cervix. During a hysterectomy
the bladder is carefully dissected away from the uterus and pushed down, so that the ureters are
also moved out of the way. The ureter is visualized or palpated to ensure it is out of the way
before clamping is applied to the uterine artery pedicle.

SBA QUESTIONS
1 A 38-year-old woman underwent total abdominal hysterectomy for heavy menstrual bleeding
yesterday, with ovarian conservation. On your morning ward round you find that she is pale, with a
blood pressure of 110/68 mmHg and a pulse of 88. Her temperature is 36.8ºC. Her abdomen is
soft, but there is considerable tenderness in the left lower quadrant. Her urine output since surgery
has been 350 ml. The nurse caring for the patient reports that the patient was very dizzy and light
headed, and vomited when she was taken out of bed that morning.
Which of the following statements describes the most appropriate management? Choose the single
best answer.
A Ensure the patient has adequate analgesia and prescribe extra intravenous fluids and an
antiemetic.
B Take a urine sample and commence intravenous antibiotics.
C Arrange an urgent FBC and ask for review by your consultant.
D Explain that the patient does not require hormone replacement therapy and review her that
afternoon.
ANSWER
C The signs of paleness, tachycardia and dizziness suggest blood loss. Blood pressure is often
maintained in healthy women. The site of a possible intra-abdominal bleed is the left side. Always
keep your consultant informed. FBC will confirm if there is blood loss as expected, then further
imaging will identify the size of the collection. Subsequently, her clinical status and serial blood
picture will identify further management. The FBC will identify whether blood transfusion is
needed, but meanwhile intravenous crystalloid should be given to maintain blood pressure and
urine output. The site of the bleeding is often the vaginal angle.
2 A 56-year-old woman with endometrial cancer diagnosed on outpatient biopsy attends her
preassessment appointment for her planned laparoscopic hysterectomy and bilateral salpingooophorectomy. She has hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, ischaemic heart disease and a BMI of 39.
She smokes 25 cigarettes day.
Which of the following statements is not correct? Choose the single best answer.
www.medicalebookpdf.com

A She will require a high-dependency anaesthetic bed to be available after surgery.
B Early mobilization and antiembolic stockings will be sufficient thromboprophylaxis.
C You will arrange a chest X-ray, ECG, urea and electrolytes.
D She should be counselled about the possible need for laparotomy as part of her surgical consent
process.
ANSWER
B She is at high risk for thromboembolic events and will require low-molecular weight heparin for a
minimum of her inpatient stay and possibly for 6 weeks.

www.medicalebookpdf.com

www.medicalebookpdf.com

Index
Note: Page numbers in italic refer to tables or boxes; those in bold refer to figures
abdominal examination 24
abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB) 21, 21, 31–2, 49
acute 53–4, 54
heavy (HMB) 21, 50–3, 56–7
postmenopausal (PMB) 50, 207–8, 207
terminology 49, 50
abortion 69, 69, 85–8, 90
Abortion Act (1967) 85–6
actinomyces-like organisms (ALOs) 80
adenomyosis 50, 159, 167, 175–6, 179
adhesions
endometrium 42, 43, 93, 166, 171, 242
Fallopian tubes 93, 126, 127
ageing population 108–9
AIDS-defining illnesses 130
alcohol 92
5-alpha-reductase deficiency 40–1
α-fetoprotein (AFP) 156, 196, 200
alternative and complementary therapies 114, 114
amenorrhoea 41–3, 41, 84, 179
anal canal 14
anatomy
female 4–14
surgical 229–30, 246
androgen insensitivity 40
androgens 35, 106, 107
anovulation 42, 48
anti-D immunoglobulin 64
anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) 1–2, 40, 94, 95
antibiotic prophylaxis 239
anticholinergic medications 144
anticonvulsants 72
antifibrinolytics 52, 175, 244
www.medicalebookpdf.com

antifungals 72, 183
antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) 62
antiretroviral therapy (ART) 72, 129, 131, 131
aromatase inhibitors 162
arterial disease, and oral contraceptive use 77
arteries, pelvic organs 10–11
Asherman syndrome 42, 43, 171, 242
bacterial vaginosis (BV) 123–4, 123, 133
barrier contraception 80–1
Bartholin’s cysts 184–5, 185
Bartholin’s glands 4, 181
bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (BSO) 108, 195, 203
bimanual examination 26–7, 26
bladder 7, 10, 14
anatomy 230
cystoscopy 242–3, 243
retraining 141
urine storage 136
bladder diary 138, 139
bladder neck, injection 145, 146
bladder pain syndrome 163, 167
blastocyst 59, 60
bleeding
surgical 246–7
see also abnormal uterine bleeding
body mass index (BMI) 92, 113
bone health, postmenopausal 111, 112
botulinum toxin 146
brachytherapy 209, 221
BRCA mutations 194, 195, 202, 203
breast cancer risk 76, 76, 117
breast development 38, 38
breast ovarian cancer syndrome 195
breastfeeding, HIV transmission 132
Brenner tumours 158
broad ligament 6, 8, 9–10, 11
Burch colposuspension 144, 145
Ca 19-9 156, 196
Ca 125 156, 196, 196, 199, 201
cancer risk
HRT 117
oral contraceptives 76, 76

www.medicalebookpdf.com

candidiasis 123, 124, 124, 183, 191
carcinosarcomas 210
cardiovascular disease (CVD) 111, 116, 117–18
case histories
abnormal uterine bleeding 31–2
chronic pelvic pain 165–6
dysmenorrhoea 56
ectopic pregnancy 65
endometrial cancer 210–11
endometriosis, surgery 245
female genital mutilation 191
imperforate hymen 16–17
infertility 102
ovarian cancer 201–2
PCOS 46, 47, 48
pelvic inflammatory disease 132–3
premature ovarian failure 118
sterilization 89
urinary incontinence 152
uterine fibroids 177–8
vulval tumour 226–7
cervical cancer 76, 213–18
clinical presentation 218–22
diagnosis 215–16, 217
global burden 216
pathophysiology 219
prevention 213, 215–16, 218
treatment 219–22, 228
cervical cytology 215, 227
cervical ectropion 169–70, 170, 176
cervical glandular intraepithelial neoplasia (CGIN) 219
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) 129, 130, 214–15
treatment 217–18, 217, 227
cervical polyps 170, 170
cervical screening 215–16
cervical stenosis 170
cervix
anatomy 6, 13, 169
biopsy 216, 218, 219, 220, 228, 241
chancre 128
chemotherapy 198–9, 222
childbirth, injury during 136, 147
children 121–3, 122
www.medicalebookpdf.com

chlamydia infection 123, 125–6
choriocarcinomas, non-gestational 200
chronic pelvic pain (CPP) 23, 163–6, 163
clear cell carcinomas 194–5
clitoris 3, 4
clomiphene citrate 96, 244
‘clue cells’ 123, 124
cognitive function, post-menopause 110
colpocleisis 153
colporrhaphy 240
colposcopy 216, 217
colposuspension 144, 145, 240
combined hormonal contraception (CHC) 37, 73, 74–7
endometriosis 162
interactions 72
safety and contraindications 71–2, 72, 76, 77, 89, 90
side-effects 73
complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS) 40
conception, natural rates 91
condoms 80, 81
congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) 41
consent 236–7, 245
contraception 22, 55
efficacy 70–1, 71
emergency 84, 84, 90
following abortion 88, 90
global unmet need 69
and HIV 131
interactions 72, 72, 131
long-acting reversible methods (LARC) 70, 71
mechanisms of action 70
medical eligibility criteria 71–2, 72
methods 74–84, 89–90
non-contraceptive health benefits 73, 90
opportunities to provide 84–5, 85
safety and side-effects 71–3, 72, 76–7, 76, 89, 90
contraceptive cap 81, 81
copper intrauterine device (Cu-IUD) 79–80, 79, 84, 90
corpus luteal cyst 157
corpus luteum (CL) 35–6, 36, 59
cystoscopy 242–3, 243
danazol 162
www.medicalebookpdf.com

deinfundibulation 190
dementia 110
depression 167
dermoid cyst 157, 158, 158, 203
detrusor muscle 136
detrusor overactivity (DO) 137, 137, 138
diagnosis 142, 143
treatment 146
diabetes mellitus 191, 206, 210–11
diaphragm (contraceptive) 81, 81
diet 113
disorders of sexual development (DSD) 39–41
drug interactions 72, 72, 131
duloxetine 144
dysgerminomas 200, 202
dysmenorrhoea 54–5, 56, 245
dyspareunia 182, 186
ectopic pregnancy 62–4, 65, 126, 127
embryos
implantation 36, 37, 59–60, 60
preimplantation genetic diagnosis 100–1
transfer technologies 99–100
endodermal sinus yolk sac tumours 200
endometrial biopsy (EB) 30–1, 51, 52, 56, 179
endometrial cancer 117, 205–11
aetiology 206, 206
classification 205, 206, 211
clinical features 207
diagnosis and staging 207–8, 208, 212
incidence 205
management and prognosis 208–9, 209, 247
prevention 206, 206
endometrial polyps 50, 50, 93, 170–1, 171, 176, 179
endometrioid adenocarcinomas 205, 208, 211, 212
endometriomas (‘chocolate cysts’) 157, 158, 160, 162, 168, 243
endometriosis 93, 102, 158–63, 165
aetiology 159
associated ovarian cancers 194–5, 203
clinical features 159
diagnosis 159–61
incidence 159
and infertility 161, 161
www.medicalebookpdf.com

management 161–3, 245–6
endometrium 6, 36–7, 36, 37
ablation 53, 53
hyperplasia 205, 207–8, 211
scarring 42, 43, 93, 171, 242
ethinyl oestradiol 244
etonorgestrel 77
external genitalia
anatomy and development 3, 4, 181
examination 25, 25
Fallopian tubes 6–7, 17
blockage 93, 97, 98, 126, 127
cysts 158
ectopic pregnancy 62, 62, 64
occlusion 81–2, 243
patency assessment 95, 95, 96, 102–3
female genital mutilation (FGM) 188–91, 189
ferritin levels 183
fertility
awareness 83–4
preservation 101
see also subfertility
fetal development 1–3
fibroids 28, 32, 50, 138, 172–8
classification 172, 180
clinical features 172–3, 172, 177–8, 180
diagnosis 173, 173
and fertility 93, 97
treatment 53, 173–5, 178, 179, 241
fibromas, ovarian 158
FIGO staging
cervical cancer 219, 220
endometrial cancer 208
ovarian tumours 197, 199
vaginal cancer 222
vulval cancer 225
Filshie clips 81, 82, 243
Fitz-High–Curtis syndrome 126, 126
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) 34–6, 34, 36, 38, 106, 107, 113, 119
Gardnerella vaginalis 123, 124
genetic diagnosis, preimplantation 100–1
germ cell tumours 155–6, 158, 194, 200–1

www.medicalebookpdf.com

gestational age 60
gestational trophoblastic disease (GTD) 64, 67
gestrinone 162
gonadal dysgenesis 40
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) 34, 34, 38, 106, 107, 119
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists 52, 55, 98, 108, 162, 173–4, 175, 232, 244
gonorrhoea 123, 125, 125, 133
granulosa cell tumours 200, 203
heavy menstrual bleeding (HMB) 21, 50–3, 56–7
hepatitis B and C 123
herbal treatments 114
hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) 195
herpes simplex virus (HSV), types 1 and 2 126–7
heterotopic pregnancy 62, 63
history
gynaecological 19–23
sexual 122–3, 122
hormone replacement therapy (HRT) 37, 114–18
hot flushes 109, 114, 114, 116, 119
human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) 59, 60, 63, 64, 98–9, 156, 196
Human Fertilisation and Embryo Authority (HFEA) 98
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 122, 123, 129–32, 214
global burden 129, 130
human papillomavirus (HPV) 127–8, 213–14, 222
testing 215, 227
vaccines 218
hydatidiform mole 64, 67
hydrosalpinx 93, 97, 98, 126, 127
hymen 4
imperforate 15–17
hyperemesis gravidarum 64
hyperprolactinaemia 43, 43
hypo- and hypergonadism 38–9, 39, 41–2
hypothalamus 33, 34, 41
hysterectomy 230–2
complications 8, 231–2, 231, 246–7
endometriosis 162–3, 245–6
fibroids 174, 175
menstrual disorders 46, 53
oophorectomy 231–2, 246
radical in cervical cancer 220, 221, 228
radical in endometrial cancer 208–9, 209, 212
www.medicalebookpdf.com

routes 230–1, 231
vaginal prolapse, after 150
hysterocontrast synography (HyCoSy) 95, 102
hysterosalpingogram (HSG) 95, 95, 102
hysteroscopy 51, 51, 239, 240, 242
endometrial carcinoma 207–8, 207
endometrial polyp 171, 171
fibroids 173
sterilization 82, 83
implantation 36, 37, 59–60, 60
in-vitro fertilization (IVF) 98–101, 99
incisions 234, 234
inhibin 106, 107, 156, 196, 200
intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) 99, 103
intrauterine contraceptives 78–80, 79, 84, 90
copper device (Cu-IUD) 79–80, 79, 84, 90
progestogen-releasing 52, 54, 56, 78–9, 84, 116, 173, 175, 179, 244
intrauterine insemination (IUI) 97–8
intrinsic sphincter deficiency (ISD) 136
investigations, common gynaecological 30
irritable bowel syndrome 161, 163, 167
Kallman’s syndrome 41
‘kissing ovaries’ 160, 168
Krukenberg tumours 23, 193–4, 203
labia majora/minora 3, 4, 181
laparoscopy 234–5, 241, 242, 243
endometriosis 160–1, 160
ovarian drilling 96, 97
large loop excision of transformation zone (LLETZ) 217, 217, 227, 241
leiomyomas, see fibroids
leiomyosarcomas 210, 211
levator ani muscles 5, 8, 9, 9, 14, 147
levonorgestrel intrauterine system (LNG-IUS) 52, 54, 56, 78–9, 79, 84, 116, 173, 175, 179, 244
lichen planus 184
lichen sclerosus 184, 185, 223
lifestyle changes 55, 113, 113
linear accelerator 221, 221
LOFTI model 187
low-molecular weight heparin 232
luteinizing hormone (LH) 34, 34, 35–6, 38, 98, 106, 107
lymphadenectomy, groin 224–5
www.medicalebookpdf.com

lymphatics 13–14, 13
lymphoedema 221
Lynch syndrome 195, 206
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 28, 29, 30
adenomyosis 176, 176
endometrial cancer 208, 208, 212
endometriosis 160
fibroids 173, 174
ovarian tumours 196
male fertility 93, 96
male sexual development 1–2
Mayer–Rokitansky–Kuster–Hauser syndrome 16
Meig syndrome 158
menarche 34, 38
menopause 5, 6, 7
assessment and management 22, 107, 112–14, 113
definitions 105, 105
genital tract changes 110–11, 110, 119
iatrogenic 108
impact of 109–11, 112
non-physiological 107–8
physiological 106–7, 119
menstrual cycle, physiology 33–7, 36
menstrual obstruction 15–17
menstruation 37, 47–8
see also abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB); premenstrual syndrome (PMS)
metformin 44
methotrexate 64
Meyer’s ‘coelomic metaplasia’ theory 159
microscopy, STIs 123, 124, 133
midstream specimen of urine (MSU) 138, 152
midurethral tape procedures 144, 145, 153, 240
mifepristone 61–2, 87
mirabegron 144
miscarriage 60–2, 61, 241
misoprostol 61–2, 87
mucinous carcinomas 194–5, 203
Müllerian defects 15–16, 42
Müllerian structures 3, 3
myomectomy 53, 174, 175, 177, 178, 241
myometrium 6
nabothian follicles 170, 170, 214

www.medicalebookpdf.com

neonatal herpes 127
nerve entrapment 163
nerves, pelvic 14, 14, 147
non-consummation 187–8, 191
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) 37, 161–2, 175, 244
norethisterone 52, 57
nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) 123, 125, 126, 133
obesity 109, 141, 195, 206, 211
oestrogen
physiological 34, 34
contraceptives 74, 244
HRT 115–16, 119, 144, 244
in menopause 107
oligomenorrhoea 41–3
oophorectomy
endometriosis 162–3
in hysterectomy 231–2, 246
oral contraceptive pill 74–7
osteoporosis 111, 111, 112
ovarian artery 10
ovarian cancers 117
aetiology and risk factors 194–5, 195
borderline (BOTs) 194–5, 203
classification 193–4, 194
clinical features 196
diagnosis 196–7, 196
germ cell tumours 155–6, 158, 194, 200–1
incidence 193
management and prognosis 197–9, 198, 199, 201–2
and oral contraceptive use 76
prevention 195–6
sex cord stromal tumours 158, 194, 199–200, 202
ovarian cysts 156, 157, 165, 168
ovarian drilling 96, 97
ovarian follicles 2–3, 34–5
ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS) 100
ovarian insufficiency, premature (POI) 42, 107–8, 118
ovarian ligament 10, 11
ovarian reserve 95, 101
ovaries
anatomy 7, 10, 11
benign diseases 155–8
www.medicalebookpdf.com

physiology 34–6
stimulation 98
suppression 162, 244
torsion 156
overactive bladder (OAB) 135, 141
ovulation 35
induction 96, 97, 244
inhibition of premature 98
oxybutynin 144, 153
paclitaxol 198–9
pad test 138
Paget’s disease, vulva 223
palliative therapy, cervical cancer 222
pelvic diaphragm 8–9, 9
pelvic examination 24–7, 26
pelvic fascia 10, 11, 147, 148
pelvic floor muscles 136, 147–8, 149
exercises 141, 150, 153
pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) 125–6, 132–3, 157, 167
pelvic mass, differential diagnosis 155
pelvic pain 23, 163–6, 163
pelvic peritoneum 9–10
perineal body 9, 147, 149
Pfannenstiel incision 234, 234
pituitary gland 34, 34
disorders 41–2
down-regulation 98, 108
platinum compounds 198, 222
polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) 42, 43–4, 46, 47, 48, 90, 209
fertility 92, 102
ovulation induction 96, 97
postmenopausal bleeding (PMB) 50, 207–8, 207
postoperative care/recovery 237, 239
pouch of Douglas 4, 6, 230
preassessment clinic 232–3, 247
pregnancy
ectopic 62–4, 65, 126, 127
establishment 59–60, 60
history 21–2
and HIV 131–2, 131
molar 64, 67
non-viable 66
www.medicalebookpdf.com

pregnancy of unknown location 63
premature ovarian insufficiency (POI) 42, 107–8, 118
premenstrual syndrome (PMS) 44–6, 232
primary peritoneal carcinoma (PPC) 199
professionalism 27
progesterone 34, 36, 36, 107, 119
progestogen-only contraceptives 77–9, 162
progestogens 115, 115, 244
prolapse 146–51, 153
surgery 151, 151, 234, 240
propiverine 144
prostaglandins (PGs) 35
psammoma bodies 194
pseudomyxoma peritoneii 194
psychological issues
after abortion 88
menopause 109–10
pelvic pain 163, 167
psychosexual problems 186–8, 186
puberty 5, 6, 7, 37–9
pubic hair 38, 38
puborectalis 147
pudendal arteries 12, 12
pudendal nerve 14, 147
radiotherapy 209, 220, 221–2, 226
rectal arteries 12, 12
rectal artery, superior 12
rectal examination 27, 27
rectum 8
retained products of conception (RPOC) 171, 241
rhabdomyosarcoma 210, 211
rhesus isoimmunization 64
Risk of Malignancy Index (RMI) 196, 203
round ligament 10, 11, 17
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG) 86
safe surgery checklist 237, 238
Sampson’s implantation theory 159
sarcoma botryoides 222
sarcomas, uterus 209–10
semen fluid analysis (SFA) 96, 96, 102
sentinel lymph node biopsy 224–5
serous carcinoma 194, 199, 202

www.medicalebookpdf.com

serous cystadenomas 158
Sertoli–Leydig cell tumours 199–200, 202
sex cord stromal tumours 158, 194, 199–200, 202
sexual abuse/exploitation 122–3, 122
sexual development 1–3
disorders 39–41
secondary 37–9
sexual history 122–3, 122
sexually-transmitted infections (STIs)
causing vaginal discharge 123–5, 124
cervicitis and pelvic inflammatory disease 125–6
testing 121–2, 123, 123
viral 126–8
see also named infections
sigmoid colon 230
smoking 89, 92, 195, 206, 214
social history 20–1
speculum 25, 25, 26
sperm
donor 100
intracytoplasmic injection (ICSI) 99, 103
quality/number 93, 96, 96
surgical retrieval 100
spermicides 81
squamous cell carcinoma
cervix 219, 222, 228
vulva 223
sterilization, female 81–2, 82, 83, 84
stroke risk 118
subfertility 91
causes 92–4, 96
and endometriosis 161, 161
history and examination 22, 94, 94, 101–2
investigations 94–6
management 96–101
surgery
cervical cancer 220, 221
consent 236–7
decision-making 233
endometrial cancer 208–9
endometriosis 162–3, 245
ovarian tumours 197–8, 198, 200–1, 202
postoperative care 237, 239
www.medicalebookpdf.com

postoperative complications 231–2, 231, 246–7
preassessment 232–3, 247
prolapse 151, 151, 234, 240
subfertility 97
urinary incontinence 144–6, 240
uterine fibroids 174, 241
sutures 235–6, 235
syphilis 123, 128–9, 129, 133
tamoxifen 206
Tanner staging 38, 38
teratomas 200
testosterone 2, 106, 107, 115, 119
theca luteal cysts 157
thecomas 158
therapeutic agents 244
thromboprophylaxis 232, 233, 239, 247
tibolone 244
trachelectomy, radical 220, 228
tranexamic acid 52, 175, 244
transvaginal ultrasound scan (TVUSS) 28, 29, 32, 156, 157, 160
Treponema pallidum subsp. pallidum 128
trichomoniasis 123, 124–5, 124, 133
Troissier’s sign 23
tubo-ovarian abscess 132–3, 156, 167
tumour markers 156, 161, 196, 196
Turner syndrome 39–40
ulipristal acetate 175
ultrasound 28, 28, 29, 32
ectopic pregnancy 63
endometrial thickness 207, 207
fibroids 173
miscarriage 61
pelvic mass/pain 156, 157
pregnancy 59–60, 60
subfertility 95
transvaginal, see transvaginal ultrasound scan
ureters 7, 8, 8, 230
urethra 7–8
urethral sphincter 136, 142, 143
urinary incontinence 152–3
aetiology 136–7
assessment 138–40, 139

www.medicalebookpdf.com

detrusor overactivity 136, 137, 138, 146
stress 136, 137, 144–6, 153
terminology 135, 136
treatment 140–6, 240
urinary tract, anatomy 7–8
urodynamic testing 140, 141–2, 143
urogenital atrophy 110–11
urogenital diaphragm (triangular ligament) 9
uterine arteries 8, 11, 12, 229–30, 246
uterine artery embolization (UAE) 52, 53, 174–5, 175, 179
uterine bleeding, see abnormal uterine bleeding
uterosacral ligaments 10
uterus
age changes 6
anatomy 5–6, 11, 12, 13–14
anomalies 15–16
fibroids, see fibroids
sarcomas 209–10
suction curettage 62, 66
version and flexion 27
vacuum aspiration 87–8
vagina
anatomy 4–5, 5, 181–2
flora 124
malignant disease 222, 222
prolapse 146–51, 153, 234
repair (colporrhaphy) 240
vaginal artery 11, 12
vaginal dilators 187–8
vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia (VaIN) 22
vaginal support pessaries 150
vaginismus 187–8, 191
vasectomy 82–3, 83
vasomotor symptoms, menopause 109, 114, 114, 116
veins, pelvic 12–13
venous thromboembolism (VTE)
and HRT 118
and oral contraceptive use 77, 77, 90
prevention 232, 233, 239, 247
vestigial structures 16
vulva 181–2
biopsy 183–4, 184
www.medicalebookpdf.com

cysts 184–5
examination 25, 182
lichen planus 184
lichen sclerosus 184, 185, 223
malignant disease 184, 223–7
pain (vulvodynia) 182, 185–6
pruritus 182–3, 182
vulval intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN) 223, 223
vulvovaginal atrophy 110–11
warts, genital 127–8
weight gain, postmenopausal 109, 114
Wertheim’s hysterectomy 220, 221, 228
Wolffian ducts 2
World Health Organization (WHO) 71, 72, 96, 237, 238
wound dressings 239

www.medicalebookpdf.com

